ICAO Annex 19 'Safety Management' TE.GEN.00409-001 Outline The case for Safety Management ICAO Annex 19 ICAO Annex 19 Part I The case for Safety Management ICAO Annex 19 ICAO Annex 19 Concept of safety What is safety Zero accidents (or serious incidents)? Freedom from danger or risks? Error avoidance? Regulatory compliance? ... ? Controlled risk and controlled error is acceptable in an inherently safe system. Safety is a systems property, it can only be determined for the whole system under consideration. Safety constraints need to be enforced at all system levels. SMS provides the framework for this to happen in a systematic way. ICAO Annex 19 Rate of accidents since 1945 & Evolution of safety thinking Technical Better technology Human HF management, CRM, FRM etc... Organisational Quality Assurance, QMS Threat & Error management System safety Safety management SMS & SSP addressing all of it : better technology Human & Organisational factors compliance risks etc.. Global rate of accidents involving passenger fatalities per 100 million passenger miles, scheduled commercial air transport operations, excluding acts of unlawful interference Why do we need to do more? Fast pace of technological change - new business models Changing nature of accidents * New types of hazards - emergence of organisational accidents Reduced ability to learn from experience * time to market for new products has greatly decreased Increasing complexity and coupling of system 'components' * cause and effect are less and less related in a direct/linear way More complex relationships between humans and automation, role of software Changing regulatory and public views (perception) on safety Organisational accidents The immediate cause of many accidents is identified as human or technical failure, but these in turn usually stem from organisational failures which are the responsibility of management. "Individual accidents are by far the larger in number. Organisational accidents are comparatively rare, but often catastrophic, events that occur within complex modern technologies." "Organisational accidents have multiple causes involving many people operating at different levels of their respective companies...Organisational accidents are the product of recent times, or more specifically, a product of technological innovations which have radically altered the relationship between systems and their human elements." James Reason, Managing the Risk of Organizational Accidents, Ashgate publishing, 1997. ICAO Annex 19 What is a safety management system (SMS)? Processes Decision- Making Safety risk The predicted probability and severity of the consequences or outcomes of a hazard. Risk Hazard A condition that could cause or contribute to an aircraft incident or accident. A series of defined, organisation-wide processes that provide for effective risk-based decision- making related to a company's daily business. ICAO Annex 19 Key processes of an SMS Hazard identification * A method for identifying hazards related to the whole organisation (operational + systemic hazards) Safety reporting * A process for the acquisition of safety data not only related to product safety Risk Management * A standard approach for assessing risks and for applying risk controls Performance Measurement * Management tools for analysing how effectively the organisation's safety goals are being achieved Safety Assurance * Processes based on quality management principles that support continual improvement of the organisation's safety performance ICAO Annex 19 QMS versus SMS Both QMS and SMS promote systems approach and continual improvement. QMS and SMS may use the same tools and techniques: e.g. performance monitoring - Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), management of business risks, process mapping / system and process analysis, auditing, surveys. An effective QMS will support the implementation of effective safety management processes. BUT Quality management systems (QMS) are geared towards customer expectations and contractual/regulatory obligations. SMS is about identifying hazards and managing risks. Processes designed to produce a quality product/service alone will not guarantee safety (safety is a systems property, not a component property). ICAO Annex 19 Part II The case for Safety Management ICAO Annex 19 ICAO Annex 19 Starting point: ICAO High-level Safety Conference 2010 RECOMMENDATION 2/5: ICAO should develop, in close collaboration with States, international and national organizations, a new Annex dedicated to safety management responsibilities and processes which would address the safety management responsibilities of States framed under the State Safety Programme (SSP). In response to the HLSC 2010 recommendation, the ICAO Air Navigation Commission recommended that the new Annex be developed in two phases: * Phase 1 involved the consolidation of existing safety management provisions previously contained in as many as 6 different Annexes, into a single new Annex. * The development of enhanced requirements is the focus of Phase 2 that started in November 2012. * The first amendment of Annex 19 Edition 1 is scheduled for November 2016. It will then follow a three- year amendment cycle. ICAO Annex 19 Transfer of common SSP/SMS elements from the existing ICAO Annexes Annex 1 Personnel Licensing Annex 6 Operation of Aircraft Annex 8 Airworthiness Annex 11 Air Traffic Services Annex 13 Aircraft Accident & Incident Investigation Annex 14 Aerodromes *Annex 19 *to the Convention on International Civil Aviation Safety Management First Edition November 2013 ICAO Annex 19 ICAO Annex 19 - Contents Foreword Chapter 1 - Definitions Chapter 2 - Applicability Chapter 3 - State Safety Management Responsibilities Chapter 4 - Safety Management System Chapter 5 - Safety Data Collection, Analysis and Exchange Appendix 1 - State Safety Oversight System (8 critical elements of oversight) Appendix 2 - Framework for a Safety Management System (SMS): 4 components and 12 elements Attachment A - Framework for a State Safety Programme (SSP): 4 components and 11 elements Attachment B - Legal Guidance for the Protection of Information from Safety Data Collection and Processing Systems ICAO Annex 19 Status of Annex components STANDARDS uniform application is recognised as necessary (differences to be notified to ICAO) RECOMMENDED PRACTICES uniform application is recognised as desirable (no need to notify differences to ICAO) APPENDICES form part of the Standards and Recommended Practices ATTACHMENTS comprise material supplementary to the SARPs, but do not have the value of SARPs (mostly guidance for application) ICAO Annex 19 ICAO Annex 19 - addressee STATES SERVICE PROVIDERS Foreword Chapter 1 - Definitions Chapter 2 - Applicability Chapter 3 - State Safety Management Responsibilities Chapter 5 - Safety Data Collection, Analysis and Exchange * Appendix 1 - State Safety Oversight System Attachment A - Framework for a State Safety Programme (SSP) Attachment B - Legal Guidance for the Protection of Information from Safety Data Collection and Processing Systems * Chapter 4 - Safety Management System Appendix 2 - Framework for a Safety Management System (SMS) * These provisions, transferred from Annex 13, provide the necessary foundation for the collection, protection, analysis and exchange of safety data to complement the SSP provisions. ICAO Annex 19 ICAO Annex 19 - Applicability Chapter 2: * The Standards and Recommended Practices contained in this Annex shall be applicable to safety management functions related to, or in direct support of, the safe operation of aircraft. ICAO Annex 19 ICAO Annex 19 - Applicability Chapter 3 / Chapter 4: approved training organizations in accordance with Annex 1 that are exposed to safety risks related to aircraft operations during the provision of their services; operators of aeroplanes or helicopters authorized to conduct international commercial air transport / CAT (Annex 6, Part I or Part III, Section II); approved maintenance organizations providing services to operators of aeroplanes or helicopters engaged in international CAT (Annex 6, Part I or Part III, Section II); organizations responsible for the type design or manufacture of aircraft, in accordance with Annex 8; air traffic services providers in accordance with Annex 11; and operators of certified aerodromes in accordance with Annex 14. international general aviation operators of large or turbojet aeroplanes in accordance with Annex 6 Part II Section III. ICAO Annex 19 ICAO Annex 19 - Applicability International General Aviation * The SMS of an international general aviation operator, conducting operations of large or turbojet aeroplanes in accordance with Annex 6, Part II, Sec 3, shall be commensurate with the size and complexity of the operation. * Recommendation.-- The SMS should as a minimum include: *** a process to identify actual and potential safety hazards and assess the associated risks; a process to develop and implement remedial action necessary to maintain an acceptable level of safety; and provision for continuous monitoring and regular assessment of the appropriateness and effectiveness of safety management activities ICAO Annex 19 SSP/SMS Components Safety Policy and Objectives Safety Risk Management Safety Assurance Safety Promotion ICAO Annex 19 Annex 19 and the EU/EASA System European Aviation Safety Programme and Plan Oversight EASA Authority Requirements State's Safety Programme (selective Authority Requirements ) SMS EASA Organisation Requirements Safety data collection, analysis and exchange Selective EASA Authority - and Organisation Requirements & EU Regulation 376/2014 on Occurrence Reporting and follow-up ICAO Annex 19 Annex 19 - further information ICAO Safety Management website: http://www.icao.int/safety/SafetyManagement/Pages ICAO Annex 19 Thank you for your attention
ISSN 2409-9066. Sci. innov. 2017, 13(5): 37--41 https://doi.org/10.15407/scine13.05.037 Nazarovets, S.A. National University of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy Library, 2, Skovorody St., Kyiv, 04655, Ukraine, tel.: +380 44 425 6035, nazarovetssa@ukma.edu.ua WAR AND PEACE: THE PECULIARITIES OF UKRAINIAN-RUSSIAN SCIENTIFIC COOPERATION DYNAMICS AGAINST THE BACKGROUND OF RUSSIAN MILITARY AGGRESSION IN UKRAINE, IN 2014-2016 The paper presents the results of bibliometric analysis of publications co-written by authors affiliated with Ukrainian and Russian institutions in 2007--2016, based on Scopus data. The survey results have shown that Ukrainian and Russian researchers continue carrying out joint research in major international projects. However, a decrease in the number of works published by Ukrainian and Russian research institutions in 2016 has testified to an adverse impact of Russia's mili- tary aggression on cooperation in the field of science. The findings are important for preparing the science development programs in Ukraine. K e y w o r d s: scientific cooperation, publication activity, bibliometric analysis, Ukraine, and Russia Collaboration among researchers from differ- ent countries simplifies acquiring of new knowl- edge, expands opportunities for further use of re- search results, and facilitates the effective sharing of skills, competences, and resources. The Ukrai- nian science has directly suffered from the Crimea occupation by the armed forces of the Russian Federation in 2014 and the subsequent Russian armed aggression in the east of Ukraine. The em- ployees of research institutions and higher edu- cational establishments of Crimea and Donbass were forced to evacuate, while most equipment and materials for research remained in the occu- pied territories [1]. In addition, under conditions of undeclared war between Ukraine and Russia, the scientists of both countries, due to objective and subjective reasons, may not be interested in establishment, continuation, and development of further coop- (c) NAZAROVETS, S.A., 2017 eration that would be mutually beneficial in peacetime. Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to study the impact of Russian military interven- tion in Ukraine on the joint scientific activities of Ukrainian and Russian researchers by means of bibliometric analysis of co-authored scholarly re- search publications issued by Ukrainian and Rus- sian institutions in 2014--2016. As a rule, the co-authored publications by re- searchers from different countries have more quotes than those issued by authors from one country [2]. Thus, the researchers are interested in publishing works in co-authorship with foreign partners, because it stimulates the growth of the readership and the world recognition of their contribution to the development of science. The results of previous studies indicate that Ukraine belongs to Russia's main scientific partners and, Russia is an important scientific partner of Ukraine. At the same time, for both countries this partnership is not the top-priority, as Ukrainian and Russian researchers work much more effec- tively with colleagues from other countries. ber of applications, with 288 projects of Ukrainian and Russian researchers scoring a success [4]. Nazarovets, S.A. An analysis of the scientific publications of Russian researchers issued in international co- authorship in 1999--2008 has shown that Ukraine is the only out of all post-Soviet countries among the top twenty countries: it was ranked the 12th in 1999--2003 and 15th in 2004--2008; the share of joint publications of Ukrainian and Russian scholars in the total number of Russian publica- tions co-authored with international colleagues made up 3.7%, in 1999--2003, and 3.8%, in 2004-- 2008 [5, 13--14]. The dynamics of main indica- tors of publication activity and the citation of Russian scientific publications in 1996--2010 have shown that the share of Russian publica- tions co-authored with Ukrainian scientists ac- counted for 5.4%, in 2010 [6]. Also, upon the results of interviews with ex- perts and science advisers to foreign embassies to Russia, as well as with representatives of leading Russian universities and research organizations, Ukraine has been listed among the most promis- ing countries for the development of internation- al R&D cooperation for the next 5--10 years [7]. So far, no general analysis of international co- operation with Ukrainian scientists involved has been made, and domestic bibliometric studies of academic collaborations have been limited to in- dividual research areas. The scientometric analy- sis of international cooperation of Ukraine in the socio-humanitarian field has shown that the most active Ukrainian researches collaborate with col- leagues from the United States, Germany, and the United Kingdom; whereas, they have much fewer common publications with Russian socio- humanist researchers [3]. In the context of Ukrainian-Russian scientific cooperation it should be noted that many compe- titions for fundamental research projects and their further implementation have been conducted jointly by the State Fund for Fundamental Re- search of Ukraine (SFFR) and the Russian Fund for Fundamental Research (RFFR). The compe- titions were marked with a record-breaking num- The joint scientific publications of researchers affiliated in Ukraine and Russia were searched on April 13, 2017, in the Scopus abstract database that provides the most complete overview of the research results in various scientific disciplines. The two types of scientific papers, the articles and the conference proceedings, (ProceedingsPa- per) for the period of 2007--2016 were consid- ered. The search was initially conducted in the Affiliationcountry field that should contain the word "Ukraine" to indicate that the author was employed at a Ukrainian institution. Then, docu- ments of the Ukrainian researchers made in co- operation with Russian colleagues (LIMIT-TO (AFFILCOUNTRY, "RussianFederation")) were selected. Also, an additional search was conduct- ed for the selection of documents co-authored by researchers of Ukraine and Russia only. For the period of 2007--2016, 7840 documents (6655 articles and 1185 proceeding papers) co- authored by the staff of Ukrainian and Russian institutions are found. The number of these joint works of Ukrainian and Russian scholars includes publications with other foreign colleagues en-vitnemukod'tsik'liK Fig. 1. The number of joint documents co-authored by Uk- rainian and Russian researchers with foreign colleagues en- gaged and the number of documents co-authored only by Ukrainian and Russian researchers, 2007--2016 based on Scopus data: kil'kist' spil'nikh dokumentiv ukrayins'kikh ta rosiis'kikh nau kovtsiv razom zi vchenimi z inshikh krayin; kil'kist' spi l'nikh dokumentiv ukrayins'kikh ta rosiis'- kikh naukovtsiv bez spivavtoriv z inshikh krayin ISSN 2409-9066. Sci. innov. 2017, 13 (5) War and Peace: the Peculiarities of Ukrainian-Russian Scientific Cooperation Dynamics Physics and Astronomy Materials Science Chemistry Engineering Earth and Planetary Sciences Biochemistry, Genetics and Molecular Biology Computer Science Mathematics Agricultural and Biological Sciences Chemical Engineering Energy Medicine 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 Kil'kist' dokumentiv Fig. 2. The most productive fields of Ukrainian-Russian cooperation in 2007--2016, in accordance with Scopus classification gaged, among which the largest share belongs to researchers from USA (1857 publications), Fran- ce (1654 publications), Poland (1599 publica- tions), Italy (1561 publications), and Great Brit- ain (1539 publications). Only 3631 documents (3030 articles and 601 proceedings) are published by researchers from Ukrainian and Russian R&D institutions (Fig. 1). The most productive institutions in terms of the number of publications co-authored exclu- sively by Ukrainian and Russian researchers are as follows: the Russian Academy of Sciences (491 publications), the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine (387 publications), the Lomonosov Moscow State University (331 publications), the Karazin Kharkiv National University (230 pa- pers), and the Taras Shevchenko National Uni- versity of Kyiv (218 publications). Thus, it can be stated that in 2007--2016 Ukrainian and Russian researchers cooperated both at the level of aca- demic institutes and at the university level. The analysis of documents co-authored by Ukrainian and Russian researchers has enabled to determine the most productive areas of Ukrai- nian-Russian cooperation, in accordance with the Scopus classification. Twelve subject areas have been selected, in which over 100 documents were published for the period of 2007--2016 (Fig. 2). Ukrainian and Russian periodicals whose Eng- lish-language versions belong to SpringerNature publisher prevail among the scientific journals that have published the largest number of docu- ments based on the results of cooperation be- tween Ukrainian and Russian researchers. It should be noted that during the last decade, the number of citations of these editions increased significantly, even if self-citations are not taken into account (Fig. 3). The largest number of doc- uments was published in the following journals: Russian Journal of Inorganic Chemistry (88), Problems in Atomic Science and Technology (72), Bulletin of the Russian Academy of Scienc- ISSN 2409-9066. Sci. innov. 2017, 13 (5) Nazarovets, S.A.snoitatiC Fig. 3. Scientific journals that have published the largest number of documents upon the results of Ukrainian-Russian scientific cooperation in 2007--2016, based on Scopus data: Semiconductors; Russian Journal of Inorganic Che mist- ry; Low Temperature Physics; Bulle tin of the Rus sian Aca- demy of Science: Physics; Problems of Atomic Science and Technology es: Physics (60), Semiconductors (58), and Low Temperature Physics (57). The obtained results show that the joint pub- lishing activity of Ukrainian and Russian re- searchers with foreign co-authors engaged, has not significantly changed after the beginning of the hybrid war between Ukraine and Russia. Therefore, it can be concluded that Ukrainian and Russian scientists have not refused to par- ticipate in international scientific collaborations, even though they may engage researchers from the aggressor country. It is clear that in 2015 and in 2014, the re- searchers published results of joint research com- pleted before the beginning of armed conflict, therefore the data for these years may be unrepre- sentative. In this context, a slight decrease in the number of works co-authored by researchers from Ukrainian and Russian R&D institutions in 2016 could be interpreted as a negative impact of Rus- sian armed aggression against Ukraine in 2014-- 2016 on the future prospects of Ukrainian-Rus- sian scientific cooperation. If such a trend really takes place in the Ukrai- nian-Russian scientific communication, then the downward dynamics in the number of works co- authored by Ukrainian and Russian researchers will continue in subsequent years, and, accord- ingly, the study of this problem will require fur- ther monitoring. However, this decrease in the number of joint publications in 2016 is not so meaningful as compared with previous years, and can be explained, in particular, by the loss of Ukraine's scientific infrastructure that remained in the occupied territory. At the same time, the collected data on the joint publishing activity of Ukrainian and Rus- sian scientists do not allow us to conclude that this cooperation was remarkably effective and successful. In recent years, Ukrainian and Rus- sian researchers have been cooperating more closely with scientific partners from other coun- tries. The previous statements of Ukrainian and Russian government officials on the crucial im- portance of Ukrainian-Russian scientific coop- eration were declarative rather than factual. A significant part of the results of this cooperation has been published in the regional periodicals not included in the world abstract databases, and, accordingly, remains inaccessible to the world academic community. This fact has nega- tive consequences for the development of sci- ence in Ukraine. International cooperation of Ukrainian scien- tists requires a separate detailed study, including a thorough analysis of the factors that encourage Ukrainian researchers to work together with in- ternational partners, and an outlook of sources of funding for joint research in Ukraine's priority scientific disciplines. Similar results will be of great practical importance both for the scientists themselves and for the top officials of government institutions interested in developing internation- al academic cooperation and in improving the quality of domestic research. ISSN 2409-9066. Sci. innov. 2017, 13 (5) War and Peace: the Peculiarities of Ukrainian-Russian Scientific Cooperation Dynamics REFERENCES 1. Schiermeier, Q. Conflictinglawsthreaten Ukrainian scien- ce. Nature. 2016. 531(7592): 18--19. doi:10.1038/ 531018a. 2. Glanzel, W. National characteristics ininternational scientificco-authorshiprelations. Scientometrics. 2001. 51(1): 69--115. doi:10.1023/A:1010512628145. 3. Solovianenko D. Riven mizhnarodnoho spivrobitnytstva Ukrainy v sotsiohumanitarnii haluzi: naukometrychnyi analiz. VII Mizhnarodna naukova praktychna konferentsiia <<Dokumentoznavstvo. Bibliotekoznavstvo. Informat siina- diialnist>>. 25--27 May 2010, Kyiv [in Ukrainian]. 4. Andrushhenko V., Kijak B., Krasovskaja O. Sotrud- nichestvo fondov fundamentalnyh issledovanij Ukrainy i Rossii: vzgljad s ukrainskoj storony na rezultaty pro- vedennyh konkursov. Vestnik RFFI. 2014. 81(1): 87--90 [in Russian]. 5. Pisljakov V. Soavtorstvo rossijskih uchenyh s zaru bezh- nymi kollegami: publikacii i ih citiruemost: Preprint WP6/ 2010/01. Moskva, 2010 [in Russian]. 6. Kotsemir M. Dynamics of Russian and World Science Through the Prism of International Publications. Fore- sightRussia. 2012. 6(1): 38--58. 7. Kotsemir M., Kuznetsova T., Nasybulina E., Pikalova A. Identifying Directions for Russia's Science and Tech- nology Cooperation. Foresight and STI Governance. 2015, 9(4): 54--72. doi: 10.17323/1995-459x. 2015.4.54.72. Received 18.04.17 S.A. Nazarovets' Naukova biblioteka Natsional'nogo universitetu <<Kiievo-Mogilians'ka akademiia>>, vul. Grigoriia Skovorodi, 2, Kiyiv, 04655, Ukrayina, tel.: +380 44 425 6035, nazarovetssa@ukma.edu.ua VIINA I MIR: OSOBLIVOSTI DINAMIKI UKRAYiNS'KO-ROSIIS'KOYi NAUKOVOYi SPIVPRATsI NA TLI ROSIIS'KOYi ZBROINOYi AGRESIYi PROTI UKRAYiNI U 2014-2016 rr. U roboti predstavleno rezul'tati bibliometrichnogo analizu naukovikh publikatsii, napisanikh u spivavtorstvi vchenimi ukrayins'kikh ta rosiis'kikh ustanov u period 2007--2016 rr. vidpovidno do informatsiyi referativnoyi bazi danikh Scopus. Rezul'tati doslidzhennia svidchat', shcho ukrayins'ki ta rosiis'ki vcheni ne vidmovlialis' vid spil'- noyi uchasti u velikikh mizhnarodnikh naukovikh proektakh, odnak zmenshennia kil'kosti robit napisanikh u spivavtor- stvi vikliuchno pratsivnikiv ukrayins'kikh ta rosiis'kikh nau- ko vikh ustanov u 2016 rotsi signalizuie pro negativ nii vpliv rosiis'koyi viis'kovoyi interventsiyi na perspektivi ukrayins'ko-rosiis'koyi naukovoyi spivpratsi. Otrimani dani maiut' vazhlive znachennia dlia viroblennia optimal'noyi politiki rozvitku nauki v Ukrayini. Kliu chov i slova: naukova spivpratsia, publikatsiina ak- tivnist', bibliometrichnii analiz, Ukrayina, Rosiia. S.A. Nazarovets Nauchnaia biblioteka Natsional'nogo universiteta <<Kievo-Mogilianskaia akademiia>>, ul. Grigoriia Skovorody, 2, Kiev, 04655, Ukraina, tel.: +380 44 425 6035, nazarovetssa@ukma.edu.ua VOINA I MIR: OSOBENNOSTI DINAMIKI UKRAINSKO-ROSSIISKOGO NAUChNOGO SOTRUDNIChESTVA NA FONE ROSSIISKOI VOORUZhENNOI AGRESSII PROTIV UKRAINY V 2014--2016 gg. V rabote predstavleny rezul'taty biblio metri ches- kogo analiza nauchnykh publikatsii, napisanykh v soav- torstve uchenymi iz ukrainskikh i rossiiskikh uchrezh- denii, za period 2007--2016 gg. soglasno informatsii referativnoi bazy dannykh Scopus. Rezul'taty issle- dovaniia svidetel'stvuiut, chto ukrainskie i rossiiskie uchenye ne otkazyvalis' ot sovmestnogo uchastiia v krup- nykh mezhdunarodnykh nauchnykh proektakh, odnako umen'- shenie kolichestva rabot, napisannykh v soavtorstve ra- bot nikov iskliuchitel'no ukrainskikh i rossiiskikh na- uchnykh uchrezhdenii v 2016 godu, signaliziruet o ne- gativnom vliianii rossiiskoi voennoi interventsii na pers pek tivy ukrainsko-rossiiskogo nauchnogo sot rud- nichestva. Poluchennye dannye imeiut vazhnoe zna chenie dlia vyra botki optimal'noi politiki razvitiia nauki v Ukraine. Kliu che vy e slov a: nauchnoe sotrudnichestvo, pub li- katsionnaia aktivnost', bibliometricheskii analiz, Uk- raina, Rossiia. 2017, 13 (5
The US Army War College Quarterly: Parameters The US Army War College Quarterly: Parameters Volume 51 Number 4 Winter 11-17-2021 Contributor's Guidelines and Article Index Contributor's Guidelines and Article Index USAWC Press Article 12 Follow this and additional works at: https://press.armywarcollege.edu/parameters Part of the American Politics Commons, Defense and Security Studies Commons, Industrial Organization Commons, Military and Veterans Studies Commons, Military History Commons, Military, War, and Peace Commons, National Security Law Commons, Other Public Affairs, Public Policy and Public Administration Commons, Peace and Conflict Studies Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Political History Commons, Public Administration Commons, Public Affairs Commons, Public History Commons, Public Policy Commons, Social Influence and Political Communication Commons, and the United States History Commons Recommended Citation Recommended Citation USAWC Press, "Contributor's Guidelines and Article Index," Parameters 51, no. 4 (2021): 157-158, doi:10.55540/0031-1723.3097. This Article is brought to you for free and open access by USAWC Press. It has been accepted for inclusion in The US Army War College Quarterly: Parameters by an authorized editor of USAWC Press. Contributor's Guidelines 153 Contributor's Guidelines Article Submissions Content Requirements Scope Submissions to the US Army War College Press must address strategic issues regarding US defense policy or the theory and practice of land warfare while exhibiting the highest standards of research and scholarship. Actionable strategic, policy, or instructional recommendations must be included. For more information, visit https://press.armywarcollege.edu. Audience US Army War College graduates, other senior military officers, policymakers, and members of academia concerned with national security affairs. Clearance Members of the US military and employees of the US Department of Defense must provide a memo from the local Public Affairs Office stating a submission is appropriate for public release (see AR 360-1, ch. 6). Concurrent Submissions Submissions must not be available on the Internet or be under consideration with other publishers until the author receives notification the submission will not be published or until the work is published through the US Army War College Press. Formatting Requirements Length 1. Monographs (accepted from USAWC faculty and staff only): 20,000 words (15,000-word main text, 5,000 words in the foreword anwd executive summary). 2. Articles: 5,000 words or less. 3. Commentaries: 2,500 to 3,000 words. 4. Book reviews: 800 to 1,000 words. File Type Text must be provided in a single MS Word document (.doc). 154 Parameters 51(4) Winter 2021-22 Visual Aids Charts, graphs, and photographs may be provided to clarify or amplify the text. Tables must be presented in the body of the Word document. Microsoft-generated charts and graphs must be submitted in Excel. And photos must be provided as .jpg images of not more than 9MB (at 300 dpi). If any table, chart, graph, or photograph has been previously published, written permission from the copyright holder to republish the content must be included with the submission. Citations Use the Chicago Manual of Style format to document sources. Indicate all quoted material by quotation marks or indentation. Reduce the number of footnotes to the minimum consistent with honest acknowledgement of indebtedness, consolidating notes where possible. Lengthy explanatory footnotes are discouraged and will be edited. Submission Requirements Address usarmy.carlisle.awc.mbx.parameters@mail.mil Include 1. For each contributor, provide the following information: full name, mailing address, phone number, e-mail address, areas of expertise, and a brief biography or curriculum vitae. 2. Attach all files, including graphics. 3. For book reviews, include the author, editor, or translator's name, the book's title, the publisher, and the publication date. 4. Abstract requirements, approximately 200 words, including the following information: a. What is the thesis/main argument of the piece in one sentence? b. How does this piece differ from what has already been published on the topic? c. What methodology and sources are/will be used? d. Why will this piece be of interest or useful to the readers of the USAWC Press, who are mainly policy and military practionners? Timelines Receipt Please allow 1 business day for confirmation of receipt. Review Articles: 4 to 6 weeks. Monographs (accepted from US Army War College faculty and staff only): 10 to 12 weeks. Cover Photo Credits 155 Cover Photo Credits Front Cover Winter Infantry Training Soldiers from Charlie Company, 2-116th Cavalry Brigade Combat Team, Idaho Army National Guard, practice combined arms battalion, squad-level infantry movements on the Orchard Combat Training Center, January 20, 2019. The training combined dry fire rehearsal culminating in a live fire exercise. Photo by Thomas Alvarez VIRIN: 190220-Z-XK920-7736 Photo ID: 5134341 https://www.dvidshub.net/image/5134341/winter-infantry-training Back Cover Chopper Pickup An Alaska Army National Guard UH-60L Black Hawk helicopter lands to pick up Air Force special warfare airmen during small unit training at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson, Alaska, November 18, 2020. Conducted under physical and mental stress, small-unit training reinforces fundamental combat skills and fosters team cohesion. Photo by Alejandro Pena, US Air Force VIRIN: 201118-F-HY271-9346C.JPG https://www.defense.gov/Multimedia/Photos/igphoto/2002542472/source/ GovDelivery/ Disclaimer: The appearance of US Department of Defense (DoD) visual information does not imply or constitute DoD endorsement. 156 Parameters 51(4) Winter 2021-22 Statement of Ownership, Management, and Circulation (Required by 39 U.S.C. 3685) 1. Publication Title: Parameters 2. Publication Number: 413-530 3. Filing Date: 30 September 2021 4. Issue Frequency: Quarterly 5. Number of Issues Published Annually: 4 6. Annual Subscription Price: $26.00 (through GPO) 7. Complete Mailing Address of Known Office of Publication: US Army War College, ATTN: Parameters, 47 Ashburn Drive, Carlisle, Cumberland County, PA 17013-5238 8. Complete Mailing Address of Headquarters or General Business Office of Publisher: US Army War College, 122 Forbes Avenue, Carlisle, Cumberland County, PA 17013-5010 9. Publisher: US Army War College, same address; Editor in Chief: Dr. Antulio J. Echevarria II, same address; Managing Editor: Ms. Lori K. Janning, same address 10. Owner: US Army War College, 122 Forbes Avenue, Carlisle, PA 17013-5010 11. Known Bondholders, Mortgages, and Other Security Holders Owning or Holding 1 Percent or More of Total Amount of Bonds, Mortgages, or Other Securities: None 12. The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status for federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preceding 12 months. 13. Issue Date for Circulation Below: Summer 2021 14. Extent and nature of circulation: a. Total Number of Copies: Average No. Copies Each Issue During Preceding 12 Months (hereinafter "Average"), 11,687. No. Copies of Single Issue Published Nearest to Filing Date (hereinafter "Most Recent"), 12,106. b. Legitimate Paid and/or Requested Distribution: (1) Outside County Paid/Requested Mail Subscriptions stated on PS Form 3541: Average, 10,574. Most Recent, 10,901. (2) In-County Paid/ Requested Mail Subscriptions stated on PSF Form 3541: Average, 0. Most Recent, 0. (3) Sales Through Dealers and Carriers, Street Vendors, Counter Sales, and Other Paid or Requested Distribution Outside USPS: Average, 471. Most Recent, 431. (4) Requested Copies Distributed by Other Mail Classes Through the USPS: Average, 317. Most Recent, 346. c. Total Paid and/or Requested: Average, 11,361. Most Recent, 11,678. d. Nonrequested Distribution: (1) Outside County Nonrequested Copies Stated on PS Form 3541: Average, 0. Most Recent, 0. (2) In-County Nonrequested Copies Stated on PS Form 3541: Average, 0. Most Recent, 0. (3) Nonrequested Copies Distributed Through the USPS by Other Classes of Mail: Average, 0. Most Recent, 0. (4) Nonrequested Copies Distributed Outside the Mail: Average, 438. Most Recent, 432. e. Total Nonrequested Distribution: Average, 438. Most Recent, 432. f. Total Distribution: Average, 11,799. Most Recent, 12,110. g. Copies not Distributed: Average, 111. Most Recent, 4. h. Total: Average, 11,910. Most Recent, 12,114. i. Percent Paid and/or Requested Circulation: Average, 96%. Most Recent, 96%. I certify the information furnished is true and complete. Antulio J. Echevarria II, Editor in Chief, US Army War College Press Article Index, Volume 51, 2021 157 Article Index, Volume 51, 2021 Aftandilian, Gregory L. "Hope versus Reality: The Efficacy of Using US Military Aid to Improve Human Rights in Egypt." Parameters 51, no. 3 (Autumn 2021): 79-90. Bensahel, Nora. "Transforming the US Army for the Twenty-First Century." [Prospectives 2021] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 39-50. Bremer, Maximilian K. and Kelly A. Grieco. "The Air Littoral: Another Look." Parameters 51, no. 4 (Winter 2021-22): 67-80. Brooks, Risa. "Beyond Huntington: US Military Professionalism Today." [Prospectives 2021] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 65-78. Brooks, Rosa. "Are US Civil-Military Relations in Crisis?" [Prospectives 2021] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 51-64. Clark, J. P. "US Army Reforms in the Progressive Era." [Retrospectives 1971] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 133-38. Colby, Darren. "Toward Successful COIN: Shining Path's Decline." Parameters 51, no. 2 (Summer 2021): 35-46. Crane, Conrad C. "Matthew Ridgway and the Value of Persistent Dissent." [In Focus] Parameters 51, no. 2 (Summer 2021): 7-18. Doctor, Austin C. and James I. Walsh. "The Coercive Logic of Militant Drone Use." Parameters 51, no. 2 (Summer 2021): 73-84. Ehlers Jr., Robert S. and Patrick Blannin. "Integrated Planning and Campaigning for Complex Problems." Parameters 51, no. 2 (Summer 2021): 97-110. Evans, Carol V. "Providing Stability and Deterrence: The US Army in INDOPACOM." [Prospectives 2021] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 25-38. Germann, Wade A. and Heather S. Gregg. "Assessing Risk at the National Strategic Level: Visualization Tools for Military Planners." Parameters 51, no. 3 (Autumn 2021): 39-50. Greentree, Todd. "What Went Wrong in Afghanistan?" [In Focus]Parameters 51, no. 4 (Winter 2021-22): 7-22. Haine, Jean-Yves and Cynthia Salloum. "Europe: A Strategy for a Regional and Middle Power." Parameters 51, no. 2 (Summer 2021): 47-60. Hamilton, Robert E. "Soviet Economic Reform--Surprisingly Prescient." [Retrospectives 1971] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 119-26. Hawley, Leonard R. "Crisis Management Lessons from the Clinton Administration's Implementation of Presidential Decision Directive 56." Parameters 51, no. 3 (Autumn 2021): 19-38. Hoffman, Frank. "Defeat Mechanisms in Modern Warfare." Parameters 51, no. 4 (Winter 2021-22): 49-66. Kaihko, Ilmari. "The Evolution of Hybrid War: Implications for Strategy and the Military Profession." Parameters 51, no. 3 (Autumn 2021): 115-28. Kem, John S. and James G. Breckenridge. "Managerial Aspects of Command." [Retrospectives 1971] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 93-100. 158 Parameters 51(4) Winter 2021-22 Kim, Tongfi and Luis Simon. "Greater Security Cooperation: US Allies in Europe and East Asia." Parameters 51, no. 2 (Summer 2021): 61-72. Klingenberg, Mitchell G. "Sherman and His Historians: An End to the Outsized Destroyer Myth?" [Review Essay] Parameters 51, no. 4 (Winter 2021-22): 95-110. Klug, Jonathan P. "The Joint Force and Lessons from 1971." [Retrospectives 1971] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 101-8. Linn, Brian McAllister. "Samuel Huntington, Professionalism, and Self-Policing in the US Army Officer Corps." Parameters 51, no. 3 (Autumn 2021): 91-100. Mason, M. Chris. "COIN Doctrine Is Wrong." Parameters 51, no. 2 (Summer 2021): 19-34. McKinney, Jared M. and Peter Harris. "Broken Nest: Deterring China from Invading Taiwan." Parameters 51, no. 4 (Winter 2021-22): 23-36. Mezzell, Ann and J. Wesley Hutto. "JDN 2-19: Hitting the Target but Missing the Mark." Parameters 51, no. 2 (Summer 2021): 85-96. Milevski, Lukas. "The Grand Strategic Thought of Colin S. Gray." Parameters 51, no. 4 (Winter 2021-22): 81-94. Muzalevsky, Roman. "Sino-Indian Border Disputes in an Era of Strategic Expansions." Parameters 51, no. 4 (Winter 2021-22): 37-48. Neiberg, Michael. "Coalition Warfare--Echoes from the Past." [Retrospectives 1971] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 139-46. Pfaff, C. Anthony and Julia L. E. Pfaff. "Academe and the Military." [Retrospectives 1971] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 109-18. Schadlow, Nadia. "Charting a Different Course." [Prospectives 2021] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 85-92. Slaughter, Anne-Marie. "Seeing in Stereo." [Prospectives 2021] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 79-84. Spain, Everett, Gautam Mukunda, and Archie Bates. "The Battalion Commander Effect." Parameters 51, no. 3 (Autumn 2021): 101-14. Terrill, W. Andrew. "Moscow in the Middle East." [Retrospectives 1971] Parameters 51, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 127-32. Valasik, Matthew and Shannon E. Reid. "The Alt-Right Movement and US National Security." [In Focus] Parameters 51, no. 3 (Autumn 2021): 5-18. Warren, Jason W. and John A. Bonin. "Reversing the Readiness Assumption: A Proposal for Fiscal and Military Effectiveness." Parameters 51, no. 3 (Autumn 2021): 51-64. Wissemann, Michael W. "Great (Soft) Power Competition: US and Chinese Efforts in Global Health Engagement." Parameters 51, no. 3 (Autumn 2021): 65-78. Call for Papers 159 Call for Papers Call for Papers for the for the Strategic Landpower Symposium Strategic Landpower Symposium 10-12 May 2022 10-12 May 2022 at the at the US Army Heritage and Education Center US Army Heritage and Education Center The US Army War College in partnership The US Army War College in partnership with HQDA G3/5/7 with HQDA G3/5/7 are pleased to announce the first annual are pleased to announce the first annual Strategic Landpower Symposium (SLS), Strategic Landpower Symposium (SLS), to solicit research and encourage to solicit research and encourage professional discussion on "Strategic Landpower in professional discussion on "Strategic Landpower in Cooperation and Competition." Cooperation and Competition." (See Chief of Staff Paper #1) (See Chief of Staff Paper #1) Papers should consider: Papers should consider: The Future Role of Strategic Landpower in: The Future Role of Strategic Landpower in: Integrated Deterrence, Cooperation, Competition, Integrated Deterrence, Cooperation, Competition, and/or Joint All-Domain Operations and/or Joint All-Domain Operations Submissions on related topics are also welcome. Submissions on related topics are also welcome. Paper proposals must be received by 1 December 2021 Paper proposals must be received by 1 December 2021 and must include a brief (<250 words) Abstract and must include a brief (<250 words) Abstract and a one-page Curriculum Vitae. and a one-page Curriculum Vitae. Submissions and inquiries should be addressed to: Submissions and inquiries should be addressed to: Dr. Gregory Cantwell | gregory.l.cantwell.civ@mail.mil Dr. Gregory Cantwell | gregory.l.cantwell.civ@mail.mil Find out more at Find out more at https://csl.armywarcollege.edu/landpower/ https://csl.armywarcollege.edu/landpower
N E W S in brief Irish biotech buoyant Dublin-based Elan recently announced it would eliminate 230 positions, with roughly half the losses at its biological manufacturing and related fill-finish facilities in Athlone, Ireland. But these job cuts, about 14% of its global workforce, are not symptomatic of a wider crisis within Ireland's biotech industry. Elan has always been a particularly tall poppy on the home front; the rest of the local sector comprises a clutch of small-scale specialty pharmas, whose relative immaturity seems to have protected it from the problems currently besetting the industry. Opsona Therapeutics of Dublin, the most prominent biotech firm to emerge in recent years, raised EUR18 ($24) million in a Series B round in February to progress a preclinical pipeline that includes an antibody targeting Toll-like receptor 2. Venture capital, historically in short supply for Irish life sciences firms, is becoming more readily available. In February, Seroba BioVentures, of Dublin, closed a new EUR75 million life sciences fund, less than one year after Fountain Healthcare Partners, also of Dublin, raised a similar sum. Meanwhile, New York-based Pfizer and Eli Lilly, of Indianapolis, are both building new biologics facilities in County Cork, and Merck, of Whitehouse Station, New Jersey, is building a new vaccines plant in Carlow. "I would say if you were to do a tot-up at the end of the year there would be an increase in biotechnology employment in Ireland," says Michael Gillen, director of the Irish BioIndustry Cormac Sheridan Association. Hospital to genotype all tumors New patients admitted to the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center will now have their tumors molecularly profiled to personalize their cancer treatment. The Boston hospital is the first to incorporate tumor genotyping as part of standard patient care. The aim is to conduct targeted DNA sequencing of all positive biopsies and tumors within one year. "In the short term, what we are trying to do is to identify specific molecular alterations in [a patient's] particular tumor that can then be matched with their specific therapy," says Darrell Borger, the lab's codirector. Tumor profiles will be obtained from a genotyping platform including more than 110 single nucleotide polymorphisms known to be present in human cancer genes, ten of which have targeted therapies either commercially available or in clinical trials. Most of these mutations are in the usual cancer suspects--KRAS, TP53 and EGFR. The plan is to complete the tumor's molecular profiling within two to three weeks of a patient's admission, enabling physicians to prescribe targeted therapies. Gary Schwartz, chief of Melanoma and Sarcoma Services at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, says, "As the technology becomes standardized, the costs will come down and this methodology will become part of the standard of cancer care." James Netterwald Institute for Regenerative Medicine, in San Francisco, is considering shifting resources to support sorely needed clinical trials--a move that could prove helpful to companies trying to bring hES cell-based products to market. Such measures are welcome but do not go far enough, according to Michael West, who is CEO of BioTime, in Alameda, California, and founder of Geron of Menlo Park, California. "It helps enormously for the gov- ernment to remove hES [cell] restrictions," he says. "But the strategic thing to do would be to stimulate the economy and the biotech industry with a federal initiative on degen- erative diseases. They will cost the country trillions of dollars in the next ten years as the 'age wave' of baby boomers hits shore." Such an initiative, particularly if based on a venture capital model could leverage invest- ments, stimulate the industry and eventually save taxpayers in terms of reducing health- care costs, he adds. Current increases in federal research spending, such as the stimulus package, "make investors more comfortable, [and] make it more likely that VCs [venture capi- talists] will receive funding instead of that money going for T [US Treasury] bills," says Arthur Klausner, who was until recently with Pappas Ventures, located in Durham, North Carolina. "If you go back six months, people had no idea when the economic situation would turn around; now in 2009, there is more of a sense that there is light at the end of the tunnel." Both the federal stimulus package and the omnibus appropriation boosted funding for the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), according to the Alliance for a Stronger FDA in Silver Spring, Maryland, near Washington. The appropriations bill, for instance, added $325 million to the FDA for 2009, an increase of almost 20% over the previous year that puts the agency appropriation in excess of $2 billion for the first time (not counting user fees). This additional funding will help the agency to move forward with plans to consolidate many of its offices and laborato- ries into a campus-like setting in White Oak, Maryland, in suburban Washington. Also in mid-March, President Obama named Margaret Hamburg as the next FDA commissioner and Joshua Sharfstein to be principal deputy commissioner at FDA (Nat. Biotechnol. 27, 297, 2009); the President also said he was forming a federal food safety working group. Hamburg, a former New York City health commissioner, recently focused on biodefense issues while working at the Washington-based Nuclear Threat Initiative. Sharfstein, who served as health commissioner of Baltimore, is now the acting FDA commissioner pending Senate review and confirmation of Hamburg. Both Hamburg and Sharfstein are "impres- sive" because they are inclined to "seek the counsel" of the professional staff at the agency, according to Peter Pitts of the Center for Medicine in the Public Interest in New York. "If they set the agenda and seek buy-in, they will succeed," he says. Moreover, while serving as acting commissioner, Sharfstein is proving a "very thoughtful listener, and what's going on is going well." Whether the FDA will be split into two agencies--one to deal with drugs, therapeu- tics and medical devices, the other to deal with food and possibly tobacco--remains an open possibility, according to Pitts. Although it would be a "good thing" to move forward with such a split to enable each new entity to "focus on its own mission," he says, the White House indicates that this contemplated change "will not happen soon, even if it's highly plausible that it will be done eventu- ally." The bigger problem is that "FDA needs more resources," he adds. "You can mix and match, but if you don't have more resources, it's just talk." Jeffrey L Fox Washington DC in their words "Virtually everybody outside the FDA has an opinion and is very vocal about it." In a leaked departing memo, former US Food and Drug Administration acting commissioner Frank Torti seeks to boost staff morale and counter the barrage of external criticism. (Wall Street Journal Health blog, April 6, 2009) "The only thing that is remarkable is that there is a very rich man who is going to fund it." Kari Stefansson, chief executive officer of deCODE Genetics, provides his opinion of an online Parkinson's disease project backed by Google cofounder Sergey Brin. (New York Times, March 11, 2009) "You can't just turn off the lights in a company in a day." CFO Matthew Loar, after investors attempted to liquidate Neurobiological Technologies, a company that makes a stroke drug based on the Malayan pit viper. Among other things, the company must figure out what to do with 1,000 poisonous snakes. (New York Times, March 9, 2009) 4 0 8 volume 27 number 5 may 2009 nature biotechnology (c)2009 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved
Assessment of cyanobacteria biomass recourse potential in Ukrainian internal waters for environmentally friendly target production Christina Soloviy, Myroslav Malovanyy Department of Ecology and Sustainable Environmental Management Lviv Polytechnic National University, UKRAINE, Lviv, Stepan Bandera street, 12, E-mail: mmal@lp,edu.ua Abstract - Assessment of perspective in using Ukrainian internal waters cyanobacteria biomass for multi-target production was conducted. Keuwords - biomass, cyanobacteria, environmental threat, biotechnology, resource potential. Searching for alternative energy sources under conditions of Ukrainian energy market alteration is specifically relevant. Among renewable energy sources that are used in world practice, prominent place takes biomass - wastes from wood processing, agricultural products, special forestry and agricultural energy plantings. In some regions cultivating and using plants as a source for energy carriers production has taken to such extent, that it led to reduction to agricultural production critical level and caused civil protests in some countries (Mexico, Latin America). This is why scientific efforts have been recently directed to searches for cultivating technologies and applying for energy producing biomass types, using of which wouldn`t affect reduction of agricultural production potential opportunities and environmentally hazardous impact. Set of studies (Israel - Seambiotic company, Japan - Gas and NEDO companies, USA - GreenFuel Technologies) have shown that algae can be the reguired biomass - both cultivated on special farms and harvested from hydrosphere surface objects. Such perspective for Ukraine is cyanobacteria (blue-green algea) that have been recently causing environmental threats due to progressive water blooming. Water <<blooming>>, dominant agents of which for Dnieper reservoirs are representatives of Microcystis, Phormidium, Aphanizomenon, Anabeana and Oscillatoria genera is a biological signal of troubles in hydro-ecosystems. Among numerous mechanical, physical - chemical, biological and environmental methods for massive cyanobacteria development warning, the most effective are the last two, since they enable to avoid the cause, but not the consequences of water <<blooming>> [1]. Concerning perspectives for using them to obtain energy, then the most perspective solar energy utilizers appeared to be microalgae: maximum photosynthesis Energy conversion efficiency ratio gains 20%. Energy that is contained in 1 m3 of biogass is equivalent to 0,6 m3 of natural gas or 0,7 dm3 of crude oil or 0,6 dm3 of diesel fuel. That is why using cyanobacteria during their massive development (so called <<blooming>>) in Dnieper reservoirs water area to obtain biogas will enable to receive not only additional energy source but will lead to improvement of sanitary-hygienic water level and coastal areas. Problem for such biogas production technology is cyanobacteria harvest, that can be carried out with the help of special barge-harvesters [2]. Additionally cyanobacteria biomass processing aiming to obtain products of different purpose can be relevant for such industry fields as medicine, pharmacology, cosmetology and parfume industry, as well as for agriculture (obtaining of organic-mineral fertilizers and organic pesticides) [3, 4]. Main part In our opinion in order to assess perspective biotechnologies of target products from Ukrainian internal water cyanobacteria biomass production it is necessary to conduct range of complex studies. First of all it is important to evaluate perspective of using cyanobacteria 2nd INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC CONFERENCE "CHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY AND ENGINEERING - 2", JUNE 24-28TH, 2019, LVIV, UKRAINE biomass resource potential for production of certain types of products: energy carriers, range of products from agricultural, medical, pharmacological, cosmetological and parfume industry. It is necessary to identify the most perspective types of cyanobacteria for application in each of these technologies and shape optimal application principles for these innovative technologies. It is worth to mention that for some products essentially important are toxicological facilities of cyanobacteria. These facilities are also vital for minimization of environmental threats from uncontrolled development of cyanobacteria in Ukrainian internal water. And last but not least it is important to study optimization and intensification of harvest processes, concentration and preliminary processing cyanobacteria in Ukrainian internal waters gaining its most effective application as resource potential in determined technologies that have been formerly studied. As for perspectives from using resource potential of cyanobacteria to produce wide range of healthy products, then previously we suggested [3] scheme of biotechnological ways for complex processing of blue-green algae and fields for their application (Fig.1.) Fig.1. Biotechnological ways of blue-green algae complex processing and the industries of application of its products. It has been fully studied on using cyanobacteria biomass resource potential of Ukrainian internal waters in energy carriers production technologies - implementation of methanogenesis technology with obtaining of condensed biogas [1,2,4] and lipid extraction with obtaining of raw material for biodiesel production [4]. It has been proved possibility of receiving condensed organic fertilizers from residual biomass after obtaining of biogas [4], previously conducted studies require generalization and concretization, necessary development of studies for establishing perspective in using cyanobacteria as organic pesticides. Aspects in using cyanobacteria biomass as resource material in medicine, pharmacology, cosmetology and parfume industry require detailed studies. This is because this biomass is potential source of chromoproteids (comples of coloured proteins that change their colour 2nd INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC CONFERENCE "CHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY AND ENGINEERING - 2", JUNE 24-28TH, 2019, LVIV, UKRAINE depending on uptake), including phycobiliproteins (red and blue pigments). Hemeproteins, flavoproteins and phycobilins are also present in this biomass. Pigments that are added to cosmetic mixtures improve skin tissue breathing hence facilitate rejuvenation. Hyaluronic and glucuronic acids are of special interest. Their synthesis under production conditions is very complicated, that's why cyanobacteria biomass is valuable resource material for receiving these compounds. They are easily extracted from residual dry biomass via hydroalcohol extraction with further recrystallization under temperature above (40-50)oS. Under higher temperatures molecules of these multibasis organic acids lose biological activity since they become racemates or dycarboxylate. Conclusion Conducted analysis claims about perspective from using cyanobacteria biomass of resource material for production of variety products that are valuable in many industry fields and both agriculture. Important is that using this biomass as raw material it is possible simultaneously to reduce environmental threat from uncontrolled development of cyanobacteria in water areas of Ukrainian internal waters. Suggested algorithm of studies concerning identification of the most perspective types of cyanobacteria to concrete innovative technologies for target production.
Editorial ________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ International Politics Reviews (2014) 2, 1-2. doi:10.1057/ipr.2014.9 Sixteen years ago, I had the good fortune to travel to Gurzuf, Ukraine on a study abroad trip. It was a visit that sparked my interest in Central and Eastern European poli- tics, started me on the path to learning Russian and instilled in me a desire to study international relations. In the late 1990s Europe was still aflutter with the idea of a continent at peace. The Balkan wars were traumatic, but by and large, the 'big' conflicts were resolved; as Francis Fukuyama put it, it was the end of history. Many people told me that I was silly to study European history and politics with German and Russian. I was told on numerous occasions that I should learn Chinese or Arabic or Farsi. Sadly, peace in Europe still seems a far-fetched idea and the end of history seems a long way off. Even if the Euro-Atlantic area conforms to the concept of the secu- rity community and is a space of 'postmodern politics', Europe's neighbours remain mired in modernity. For the second time in six years Moscow used military force to change the status quo in Europe. The revisionist politics of Putin's Kremlin do not care much for EU or US sanctions. Indeed it seems that when Putin looks West, he sees weakness in Brussels and Washington. As the crisis in Ukraine plays out, IPR looks back to the last time Russia changed the status quo in Europe, offering in our pages an autopsy of sorts on the international diplomacy around the Russo-Georgian War of 2008. Hans Mouritzen and Ander Wivel's book Explaining Foreign Policy: International Diplomacy and the Russo-Georgian War offers both methodological advances as well as information from a range of sources on the actual conflict and it seemed an opportune time to review their work. In the forum, Cambridge's Christopher Hill provides us with an excellent discussion of the theoretical issues surrounding foreign policy analysis and the unique explanatory framework that Mouritzen and Wivel use in their book. Alse Toje and Flemming Splidsboel Hansen offer analysis of how the Russian invasion of Georgia in 2008 fits into theory, as well as the implications for the practice of international relations. The forum provides evidence to substantiate the claim that a near total lack of response from the interna- tional community in 2008 certainty emboldens Russia with regard to its annexation in Crimea. As the authors note, 'the future world order is likely to be more to Russia's liking than it has been at any time in the post-Cold War years'. Although Western Europe likes to think itself a post- modern power, Putin's lack of concern over sanctions from Europe illustrates the challenges that the EU faces in wielding power. For over a decade now numerous studies have discussed the EU as a 'normative power' (Manners), a 'civilian power' (Duchene) and an actor with immea- surable amounts of 'soft power' (Nye). But how effec- tive can such a power be on the world stage? And the conceptualization of the EU as a normative power is largely reflexive - how does the rest of the world see the EU? This question is the focus of Henrik Larsen's exam- ination of the external perception literature focused on the EU. Within the literature, Larsen identifies a large gap between how the EU presents itself and how external actors perceive the EU. Larsen contends that this perception gap is problematic for the EU as it seeks to become a more influential and coherent international actor. This conclu- sion raises in my mind Hedley Bull's (1982) early critique of Europe as a civilian power. Bull argued that civilian power was linked to the state's military power and that only through military self-sufficiency could the EU be a civilian power. Looking at the current state of affairs between the EU and Russia, one cannot help but think that perhaps Bull was right. INTERNATIONAL POLITICS REVIEWS | IPR VOLUME 2 | MAY 2014 | 1 (c) 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved Editorial Although Russia's occupation of Ukraine is causing headaches in Europe, there are also global dimensions to the problem for the US president to consider. Although hawks are calling on President Obama to strike back against the Kremlin, the President's seemingly slow and cautious response is due in part to the linkages of the Ukraine problem with other issues of critical importance. Most worryingly, the United States relies on the use of Russian airspace to supply US and NATO troops in Afghanistan. Russia is also a major supporter of Assad in Syria and, last but most certainty not least; Russia is involved in the P5+1 talks on the Iranian nuclear programme. President Obama has defied expectations and many of his detractors at home to forge ahead with his programme of outreach to Iran, and he must want to maintain the posi- tive momentum. Only a couple years ago the thought of the American and Iranian presidents talking on the phone was pure whimsy. Today, not only have both men have spoken to each other, but their diplomats speak on a regular basis. Mr Obama does not want anything to jeopardize this pro- gress, but he should be careful in thinking that by giving Putin a pass on Ukraine, the Kremlin will not upend the boat in Tehran. Russia is only important in the Middle East so long as Iran and Syria are problems. The Kremlin's leverage stems from their connections to these govern- ments, so a repprochement between Tehran and Washington will reduce the Kremlin's importance in the Middle East. No matter what the situation is the President decides, fraught with challenges, not in the least from the Iranian side as Occidental College's Huss Banai explores in his piece 'The Wages of Enmity'. Banai provides an insightful review of three recent books looking at the long history of US-Iran relations that illustrates why overcoming the legacy of the past is just so hard to do. Finally, many critics of Obama's 'reset' with Russia contend that the President got little in return for his sell out to the Kremlin, but these commentators overlook Russian cooperation with the United States on counter-terrorism issues. As the recent revelation of US National Security Agency spying continues to reverberate through the inter- national community, it is evident that Washington remains extremely concerned about preventing terrorist attacks, even if the rhetoric of the war on terror ended some time ago. Sam Mutter in his article, 'US Counterterrorism Measures Since 9/11: The Politics and Morality of Law and Excep- tion', deconstructs the challenges at the heart of counter- terrorism policies and the challenges that these policies have entailed in balancing civil liberties and security. Mutter's piece raises concerning questions as to whether or not our fear of terrorism and the blurring of terrorism with identities leads to the criminalization of any individuals of which people are frightened. The editorial team and editorial board hope that you enjoy this issue of the journal and as always we welcome your feedback and submissions for consideration! M. J. Williams E-mail: M.J.Williams@rhul.ac.uk 2 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 2 www.palgrave-journals.com/ipr (c) 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserve
Interdisciplinary Studies of Complex Systems No. 13 (2018) 57-65 c(cid:13) L. Savenkova, D. Svyrydenko Academic Mobility and Academic Migration Issues: the Case of Ukrainian Higher Education Liudmyla Savenkova1, Denys Svyrydenko2 Abstract. The article demonstrates the globalization and regional dimen- sion of the problems of academic mobility as well as academic migration at the Ukrainian education environment. The authors' approach is based on the fact that the dialectics of globalization and regionalization has a significant influence on the essence of the processes of academic mobility and academic migration. The theoretical study and analysis of educational policy have demonstrated the need for harmonization of these processes taking into account current geopolitical challenges. The authors have ex- plored the "order of the day" of problems related to academic mobility and academic migration, taking into account current geopolitical challen- ges, trying to identify the perspective directions of study of this problem. Keywords: migration, academic migration, academic mobility, students' adaptation, brain drain, globalization, European Higher Education Area. Introduction The intensive development of mobility opportunities all around the world the expansion of not only economic, scientific, but educational contacts between countries, communication changes in the informational milieu also put the issue of adaptation of academic migrants in the conditions of residence in selected countries for education. Internationalization of higher education significantly increases the number of people who want to study abroad in more developed countries. The presence of students from other countries at universities shows the inclusion of Ukraine into the international global educational system. Partici- pation in the world educational process is one of the conditions for the successful development of a higher educational institution. Therefore, the education of abroad students occupies a significant place among the various activities of Ukrainian universities. This activity fits the logic of globalization and concep- tualized in the educational practice by the concepts of "academic mobility" as well as "academic migration". These phenomena fit into the logic of develo- ping the European Higher Education Area (EHEA) and the European Research Area (ERA), while the processes of academic mobility and migration are key tools for their implementation. These tendencies are appropriately enshrined in the European Union educational program documents. 1National Pedagogical Dragomanov University, lvsav59@gmail.com 2National Pedagogical Dragomanov University, denis_sviridenko@ukr.net 58 L. Savenkova, D. Svyrydenko At the same time, in parallel with the tendencies of globalization, com- plex processes of academic migration, caused by the geopolitical situation in the country, take place in Ukraine. In recent years, the socio-cultural space of Ukraine is under the influence of complex contradictions of a geopolitical nature, initiated by an armed military conflict in the East of Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea. These contradictions logically initiated the processes of moving (evacuating) institutions of higher education and scientific institutions into a controlled territory in order to preserve the intellectual, economic and human potential of the regions that emerged as the arena for the implemen- tation of the strategies of the hybrid war. About thirty institutions of higher education and scientific institutions made a forced move from the zone of mili- tary conflict following the desire to stay a part of the Ukrainian scientific and educational space. At the same time, material facilities (campus with educational buildings, scientific laboratories, etc.), as well as the presence of a part of teaching, trai- ning, support and student staff, allowed to create institutions of higher educa- tion and scientific institutions in uncontrolled territories. Based on such facili- ties, the own scientific and educational space is built up at the non-controlled territories from 2014. Thus, the institutions were not moved in their integrity but separated, creating "separated" institutions and the Ukrainian educational and scientific space itself lost its integrity. The authors of the article aim to explore the complex dialectic of glo- balization and regionalization trends at the processes of academic mobility and academic migration. The authors proceed from the understanding that this article is merely an "order of the day" of academic mobility and academic migration at the Ukrainian higher education system. The problem further ana- lysis requires a series of studies using statistical methods, conducting in-depth interviews and focus groups. Mobility Turn as Cultural Background of Academic Mo- bility and Academic Migration Processes As already mentioned above, the article analyzes the problems of academic mobility and academic migration in Ukrainian higher education. Addressing this problem is caused by the need to determine the place of global and re- gional trends in these processes in order to make their implementation more controlled. Indeed, the being of modern society and education is increasingly beginning to be mobile. At a contemporary social and humanities studies, broad discussion concerning the mobility trends takes place over the past de- cade. In order to demonstrate the scale of the spread of the ideology of mobility in society using "language of numbers", we turn to the indicators proposed by Ossi Naukkarinen, the Finnish researcher on the mobility problems: "In 1950 there were 53 million cars in the world; now there are more than 500 million, and according to some estimates, over 700 million. And people do use them. In Finland, which is fairly typical in this respect, the average of the private car is driven more than 10 000 kilometres per year, which is over ten times more than in 1950. The growth of air traffic is even more astonishing. In 1950, 28 billion passenger kilometres were flown by the world's aeroplanes. Today, the figure Academic Mobility and Academic Migration Issues is almost 3000 billion -- over a hundred times more. International business has also grown, which means greater numbers of objects are transported from one place to another and more currency transactions conducted" [16]. The key idea of this discussion is the awareness and further conceptual development of the concept of "mobility turn" resulting in a transformation of ideas about space and time at a contemporary society, which undergoes the radical changes to the established principles of social interaction. Indeed, mobility is a sign of the overwhelming majority of modern social phenomena: from economics and communication systems to approaches in modern educa- tion. Thomas Faist conceptualizes the essence of mobility turn in the following way: "A new paradigmatic turn has reached migration studies, the mobility turn. Following on from many turns in the recent past, such as the linguistic turn, the cultural turn and the spatial turn, the mobility turn seems to be the newest effort in diagnostic descriptions of modern society. Like other turns, the mobility turn generalizes one aspect of contemporary society to the detriment of other features. While such a turn may usefully highlight various forms of spatial mobility, it cannot be fruitfully employed unless the scholars working with this paradigm critically reflect underlying political assumptions about the nexus between spatial and social mobility. Moreover, any analysis of spatial and social mobilities needs to go beyond descriptions and start accounting for the mechanisms underlying the production of social inequalities" [8, p. 1637]. Indeed, the issue of mobility does not simply become a key methodological tool but also enters its ontological essence in the "heart" of the modern world -- the phenomenon of the movement of elements of the social world is at the "heart" of modern social transformations. Consequently, the scientists were aware of the importance of displacements in modern society and throughout the history of mankind, but now it is comprehended as one of the foundations of modern everyday being, basic value, policy instrument, etc.: "Contemporary society lives at "the coordinates" of mobility and modern individual needs to transform one's own everyday practices to stay at the advance-guard of the social development, to perform successful carrier steps etc. The reports of some international organizations are demonstrated, that at the 21-th century life success depends form the people's ability to build the life strategies (as well as educational ones) taking into account the mobility tendencies at the modern society" [24, p. 103]. Thus, as a response to the adoption of a mobility turn in all the spheres of social life, the processes of academic mobility and academic migration are gaining considerable significance in the higher education system. At the same time, the authors would like to emphasize that the phenomenon of "academic mobility" as well as "academic migration" have arisen at the tradition of higher education since the founding of the first universities in the Middle Ages. The current quantitative and qualitative surge of mobility trends has led to their unprecedented updating in the global higher education area. 60 L. Savenkova, D. Svyrydenko Global and Regional Dimension of Academic Mobility and Academic Migration Processes In the introduction, we emphasized that any complex social phenomena are implemented in accordance with the complex logic of globalization and re- gionalization. Academic mobility and academic migration are no exception. Let's consider how the processes of globalization of higher education inten- sify the mobility trends at Ukrainian higher education. Indeed, globalization contributes to increasing the intensity of migration, the erosion of borders bet- ween states, which leads to the formation of supranational social structures, so- called multicultural societies as well as multicultural educational environments in higher education. At the same time, mobility is also a tool for ensuring the negative phenomenon of "brain drain", which should also be considered in the study of positive prospects for academic mobility and academic migra- tion: "Global talent mobility, accompanied by such concepts as 'brain drain', 'brain gain', 'brain exchange' and 'brain circulation', has drawn attention from both researchers and policy-makers. Research into, and policies concerned with, the movements of high skills, including university academics, are largely from economic perspectives on globalization. Inquiries are framed by concerns for national economic growth; the notion that, 'human capital translates into economic capital that translates into national economic growth and competiti- veness'... Brain drain assumes that people who leave one country for another will never return, and that their movement is nonreversible. These unilateral flows, described as a loss of talent, are often viewed as having negative effects on the source countries which have made an educational investment in scholars who ultimately leave their home countries" [4, p. 25]. Under the influence of globalization, Ukrainian universities seek to attract a large number of foreign students in a fierce competition while addressing the issue of achieving a high level of intercultural understanding, striving to in- crease the intensity of interaction between representatives of different cultures, contributing to raising the level of education of foreign students (citizens of developing countries). At the context of global society transformation, higher education policy tries to take into account the needs of different groups that provide the development of a higher school, state structures, consumers of edu- cational services, etc., which requires the formation of new (internationally) benchmarks and standards in the field of education which would be based on the qualitative theoretical foundation: "The blurring of distinction, the breadth of opportunities for individualization and realization of freedoms, initiates the problem of distorting the deep essence of some sociocultural phenomena. The Ukrainian sphere of higher education in this context is demonstrative: Ukraine has been a participant of the Bologna process for more than ten years; however, the nature of the implementation of its ideas acquires a wide range of signs -- from imitative to pathological" [13, p. 363-364]. Since both authors work at the National Pedagogical Dragomanov Uni- versity, the empirical base that guided the direction of theoretical research was the processes of academic mobility and internationalization that took place in the educational environment of this university at 2017. The geography of the countries of the foreign students at the National Pedagogical Dragomanov Uni- versity is represented by countries such as China, Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan, Academic Mobility and Academic Migration Issues Belarus, Georgia, Italy, Moldova, Poland, Russia, Turkey, India, Uzbekistan, Syria, Israel, Iran, Portugal, etc. In total, the university has 388 international students, including 251 students, 100 postgraduate students, and 37 students in the preparatory department. As we demonstrated, the educational environment of the university has a pronounced multicultural nature and its productive functioning is a separate re- search problem. In addition, academic mobility is realized not only by students, but also by lecturers and researchers, creating a separate problem and research field: "More and more, academics are mobile, and becoming transnational, opting for international academic career development... The socio-professional networks of transnational academics and their embodied spatial knowledge are not yet seriously analyzed empirically. Is this a new academic profession? An academic profession in which all members are multilingual, regardless of disci- pline, gender, age, region of origin and so on? Transnational identities are being formed. At the moment we cannot even describe them systematically -- even though we are beginning to understand the discourses of neoliberalism and regi- onal homogenization which are invoked to increase their existence" [11, p. 403]. As we see, Ukraine is trying to fit its status of responsible "player" of the global educational area implementing the key provisions of the Bologna Declaration and other documents aimed at implementing globalization trends in higher education. At the same time, the problematic current socio-cultural (geopolitical) situation distinguishes Ukraine from other countries that carry out transit and active modernization of higher education in accordance with high European standards. These are complex processes of a geopolitical nature that create instability in terms of the territorial integrity of Ukraine (annexation of Crimea and military conflict in the East of Ukraine) which actualizes a specific, regional dimension of the processes of academic migration. As a result of the geopolitical conflict, many universities with part of the state and students carried out an act of forced migration similar to forced migration from zones of military conflicts: "This conflict caused large-scale migration processes. The millions of Ukrainian people become the subjects of migration trying to escape from the direct military activity at their cities. The Ukrainian politicians also understood the need of saving the social and intellectual capital of the regions. At the result, most of the scientific and education institutions performed the migration procedure too. However, this migration had a special nature: the institutions migrated without facilities and resources; the stuff of migrated institutions was not full too" [23, p. 129]. The Problem of Adaptation at Other Social, Cultural and Educational Environment At the previous sections of the article, we demonstrated the peculiarities of the implementation of the ideology of academic mobility and academic mi- gration at the global and regional levels. At the same time, we did not study the problems, which had arisen in Ukrainian higher education area in connection with these tendencies. Based on the logic of the study's deployment, the pro- blem of adaptation of both foreign students and internally displaced persons (students, workers of the displaced institutions of higher education) should be reviewed. 62 L. Savenkova, D. Svyrydenko Taking into account the desire of the displaced universities to become a new clusters of Ukrainian higher education system ("from scratch"), they begin to develop a strategy for development in the Ukrainian space of higher edu- cation taking into account the following fact: "The tragic bloody experience of territorial disintegration could be interpreted as a painful evolutionary step. At the result of external influence, the group of students, teachers and admi- nistrators can become a social capital for new educational institutions starting one's activity "tabula rasa". These people are firm to the values of university, firm to the European values such as freedom and democracy. They are firm to own Motherland. Thus, they may become a fundamental spiritual and intel- lectual resource for these institutions" [23, p.134]. In our opinion, it is sensible to remember the history of University of Cambridge appearing almost eight centuries ago. It appeared as a response to the socio-cultural challenges of the 13th centuries as a desire to avoid non-constructive educational practices and socio-cultural challenges of that time and place (Oxford) becoming a hub for innovation and democratic transformation. Having carried out a revision of the globalization and regional challenges of the Ukrainian higher education system, we will consider the real problem of harmonizing the communicative space of Ukrainian higher education where complex modernization processes are taking place in response to the demands of worldwide and regional tendencies. At the same time, we would like to emphasize that regional migration processes have more or less dominant role for the development of strategies for the development of higher education in Ukraine: "The academic mobility is a demonstration of a wide range of human freedoms -- the freedom to choose a place of study, the right to free movement, the academic freedom, etc. Such an understanding of this phenomenon harmo- niously fits into the context of students treatment as creative individuals, who aspire to develop and actualize their potential in getting a higher education, being declared as one of the fundamental principles of the modernization of higher education in Ukraine" [13, p. 317]. In the article, the authors tried to emphasize the fact that Ukraine is a special socio-cultural landscape for the implementation of the principles of academic mobility and academic migration. At the same time, analysis of the educational policy of recent years makes it possible to distinguish between the specific tendency that looks like a simulation of the modernization of higher education in Ukraine. Ukraine signed the Bologna Declaration in 2005, howe- ver, the Model Provision on Academic Mobility was developed by the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine only in 2014. This fact indicates, on the one hand, the lack of real mechanisms for ensuring academic mobility, and, on the other hand, the lack of normative documents to address complex processes of adaptation of foreign students and internally displaced persons. At the same time, the issue of adaptation of representatives of different cultures, religions and, in the context of current geopolitical challenges, is an important challenge that should be regulated at the legislative level: "Travelling knowledge is not simply a case of edges versus empires of knowledge or vice versa. When an intellectual travels from empires of knowledge to the edges, or indeed when they travel from the edges to empires of knowledge, they will always bring intellectual baggage with them" [9, p. 637]. Academic Mobility and Academic Migration Issues Within our research, there is a need to emphasize the contradictions which exist at the multicultural Ukrainian higher education environment. On the one hand, there are the presenters of various cultural traditions of religious beliefs, and on the other hand, even within the same country, we see the contradicti- ons of communication between the Ukrainians, which are trying to integrate internally displaced persons, by the same persons. The new socio-cultural en- vironment causes difficulties adapting also due to the perception of foreigners by university staff that do not have special training to work with such a ca- tegory of students. Linguistic and cultural adaptation gets much faster when foreign students communicate intensively with local students, for example, in dormitories. It helps to establish relationships with other students, exchange information, improve language skills, which greatly increases the efficiency of learning. The growing number of foreign students and significant funds entering the higher education system of Ukraine make incoming mobility an important branch of educational exports, while the foreigners themselves are the cate- gory whose interests must be taken into account and protected. International students sometimes encounter big difficulties in social adaptation. As it has already noted, this is isolation or the possibility of communicating with com- patriots only due to the low level of knowledge of a foreign language, the ina- dequate involvement of mobile students in extra-curricular activities, student self-government bodies [14]. Taking into account the challenges initiated by displaced universities and internally displaced persons (academic community representatives), some groups are opposed to dominant discourses, enhanced by prejudice and clich'es, which take root in the unproductive tradition of geographical determinism within Ukraine. In parallel, a large number of foreign students from different coun- tries of the world come to Ukraine every year to study at higher educational establishments. In total, the geography of the countries, where students go, includes about 148 states: according to the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine, foreigners are studying at 228 of Ukrainian universities [15]. The Minister emphasizes that only over the past two years the number of Ukrainian higher education institutions where foreign students are study increased from 185 to 228: in 2017 almost 40 000 of invitations to education were issued, which is twice as much as in 2015, therefore, more than 66 000 foreign students study in Ukraine, but there were 53664 in 2011 [15]. Conclusions The research defined the need to regulate the requirements for the lan- guage of instruction and its level of knowledge. Foreign students need to know what language they will learn (Ukrainian, Russian or English) and, if it is possible, begin to assimilate it before coming to Ukraine. After all, the respon- sibility for learning a language of instruction lies entirely on the "shoulders" of students, and not of universities, throughout the civilized world. European universities generally offer optional courses for studying English or another European language. 64 L. Savenkova, D. Svyrydenko At the same time, the regional dimension of academic mobility and mi- gration demonstrates the existence of a number of contradictions in the im- plementation of modernization processes in the field of higher education. The analysis of the legislation has demonstrated the crisis nature of the normative provision of academic mobility processes, reinforced by a complex geopolitical situation. Directly the processes of academic mobility and academic migra- tion have "marginalized" status, despite globalization and current geopolitical challenges.
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Business and Policy Studies DOI: 10.54254/2754-1169/14/20230795 Analysis of the Impact of Russia-Ukraine Conflict on World Crude Oil and Gold Price Bohao Liu1, a, * 1W.A. Franke College of Business, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ, 86001 a. bl776@nau.edu *corresponding author Abstract: The problem studied in this thesis is based on the volatility of the world economy as well as commodity prices exacerbated by geopolitical risks in the global economy due to the Russian-Ukrainian conflict. In the context of NATO's eastward expansion, tensions between Russia and Ukraine have been increasing, and an armed conflict broke out in February 2022. Russia and Ukraine are closely linked to the world economy, and their relations with a number of countries have been strained by the conflict, which has significantly changed the situation in the world and in some regions. Based on these international events and facts, this paper uses literature reading and analysis to discuss and explain the reasons for the changes in crude oil and gold prices and their impact on the international economy, especially on some European countries that import crude oil from Russia. It can be concluded that the Russian-Ukrainian conflict has multiple factors affecting the world price of crude oil, but the end result has led to its rise, which in turn has led to a rise in the price of gold as well. Keywords: Russia-Ukraine conflict, crude oil, gold price, inflation Introduction In recent years, geopolitical influences have put the countries of Russia and Ukraine in a state of tension, and with the expansion of NATO to the east and fruitless talks between Russia and some Western countries on security guarantees proposals, Ukraine has become a critical area. On February 24, Russia announced a special military operation, an event that sharply worsened the situation in Ukraine. As events unfolded, the United States and some European countries adopted sanctions against Russia in the hope of halting this conflict. Russia, the second largest oil exporter in the world, is deeply involved in the conflict, which has had a huge impact on the country's economic development, especially in terms of oil extraction and export. The restriction and reduction of exports inevitably led to a significant increase in oil prices in some countries that import large amounts of crude oil from Russia, and increased costs and even production restrictions for some giant oil companies. Secondly, due to the global increase in oil prices, which has disturbed the economic order of many countries and thus caused inflation, some countries have had to resort to increasing the price of gold to maintain financial and economic order. Therefore, the topic of this paper is about why the Russia-Ukraine conflict has led to the increase in global crude oil and gold prices, how it has affected the world economic order, and which related industries will benefit from this conflict. By revealing the above issues, it can provide some financial investment institutions and individual investors with (c) 2023 The Authors. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Business and Policy Studies DOI: 10.54254/2754-1169/14/20230795 analysis and conclusion references to help them make more diversified and diversified investment portfolios. It also objectively discusses the implications of the economic problems caused by the Russian-Ukrainian conflict for the future development of the global economy. 2. Analysis of the Impact of the Russian-Ukrainian War on Crude Oil and Gold Prices Russia is the world's 11th largest economy in terms of GDP size, a major producer and exporter of oil, gas, and coal, and has the world's 9th biggest population [1]. So, if it is involved in a war, it will have a significant impact on the global economy. Russia is not only the second largest exporter of crude oil in the world, but Russia and Ukraine are also important exporters of other energy resources. According to statistics, Russia accounts for 11.4%, 8.3% and 17.8% of global oil, gas and coal exports, respectively. Among them, about 53.5% of Russia's oil exports are supplied to Europe, about 42.6% of natural gas exports are directed to Europe, and about 34.6% of coal exports are directed to Europe. The main ones are Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, the UK and France. So it is clear from the above data that Europe is the region most affected by the increase in crude oil prices in the event of this conflict. First analyze the most direct reason Russia is restricted because of its participation in armed conflict. This disrupted the country's original economic order system, making crude oil supply upstream. At the same time, this also leads to a production gap in crude oil extraction and production, which affects the delay or even shortage of oil supply. Moreover, the United States and some Western countries have imposed sanctions and boycotts on Russian military actions. This has led to a massive withdrawal of funds from the Russian market in the complete economic system. For example: BP and ExxonMobil have withdrawn funds. The withdrawal of funds from these two major oil companies has undoubtedly caused losses and obstacles to Russia's oil exploration industry. Secondly, due to political tensions and broken diplomatic relations, Russia and Ukraine are in a state of isolation from other countries and air routes, especially parts of Europe, cutting off air routes with Russia, as reported by the Russian news agency TASS on February 27, 2022, Austria, Denmark, Sweden, Belgium, Iceland and Italy have announced their decision to close their airspace to Russian aircraft in response to Moscow's and Ukraine's military operations [2]. Previously, nine countries - the UK, Czech Republic, Poland, Romania, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Bulgaria and Slovenia - have banned Russian aircraft from their airspace [3]. In addition to the impact on crude oil shipments, the sanctions on Nord Stream 2, which transports natural gas, have all had a huge impact on Russia's energy export and supply system, which has directly led to significant fluctuations in European gas prices, especially in Germany. Because the conflict between Russia and Ukraine has a greater impact on the world's original economic order, and the impact of the epidemic on international economic and trade, the United States and other Western countries hope to stop the conflict through sanctions. These sanctions include the US and Europe excluding some Russian banks from the SWIFT payment system. This is one of the restrictions affecting Russian crude oil and other energy exports. For example, the U.S. cut off Iranian financial institutions from the global system twice in March 2012 and in November 2018, resulting in a sharp drop in Iranian crude oil exports. Russia's large banks are deeply integrated with the global financial system, and SWIFT, an international non-profit organization that provides information and services for financial transactions, is keyed to its means of payment, where countries' trade can be conducted through a transaction settlement system that uses a standard unit of settlement. Russia, as one of the important components, was excluded from the SWIFT system, which seriously affected the trading of commodities with other countries, coupled with the fact that the settlement currency can only be in the national currency, and Russia is caught in the conflict, the uncertainty of economic stability has increased significantly. This has directly affected the already tight world crude oil market. The Russia-Ukraine conflict has Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Business and Policy Studies DOI: 10.54254/2754-1169/14/20230795 exacerbated the turmoil in the world economic system, and the increase in crude oil prices has led to worldwide price hikes and inflation, affecting the economies of many countries. In particular, some oil-importing countries, such as most of Europe, as well as Japan and South Korea in the Asian region. The rise in oil prices has also led to the impact on some industrial chains that use it as a raw material. In terms of potential impact, crude oil price volatility directly affects various industries that use crude oil as a raw material. Not only that, but the cost of people's daily lives has also increased. Based on the negative impact of this event, countries had to take certain countermeasures and adjustments to hedge against the geopolitical and economic impacts. For example, in order to curb the rise in oil prices and reduce inflation, the U.S. chose to release strategic oil reserves to cope with economic fluctuations. The rise in oil prices and the shortage of supply sources in the market have allowed some other crude oil exporting countries and companies to gain more benefits and a wider market from it. Therefore, the increase in crude oil prices caused by the Russian-Ukrainian conflict has, on the one hand, had a negative impact on industries and companies that use crude oil as a raw material, such as a slowdown or even stagnation of production, an increase in production costs and disruption of the supply chain system. But at the same time, it has objectively contributed to some other industries and technologies, creating more economic value. From literature analysis, this study concluded that gold has gained an average of 138% since 1990 [4]. Almost every military conflict has been unable to avoid a rise in gold prices. The reason for this is that gold has the characteristics of a natural currency. Its value is stable. Its scarcity and the characteristics of a world currency enable it to play a role in hedging the risk of financial turbulence when the financial market fluctuates. The world's central banks and the International Monetary Fund continue to hold gold reserves as one of the most important reserve currencies, which has also contributed to the promotion of gold as a hard currency. During times of economic stability, people will put their money into strokes and speculative assets. However, during times of war, people will want to store their wealth in something that is finite, tangible, and has some form of utility [5] . In the case of the Russia-Ukraine conflict, the most important reason for the rise in gold prices is that the situation in Russia and Ukraine continues to be turbulent, and the further escalation of Western sanctions on resource-based commodities further escalates the situation. The prices of energy, metals, and agricultural products continue to rise, and the risk of stagflation in the global economy is rising, which is conducive to anti-inflation and safe-haven demand for precious metals. Furthermore, the situation in Russia and Ukraine caused the Fed rate hike to be expected to cool down quickly, and the market now expects the Fed to raise interest rates in March 25BP, which favors the price of precious metals [6]. Secondly, the dollar itself is a safe-haven asset, but if the geopolitical economic shock hits the United States' own economy, gold will be the ultimate safe-haven tool. From the development of the Russia-Ukraine conflict, it can be seen that the United States, as a major oil importer and one of the important components of the world economy, the delay and shortage of Russian crude oil supply has caused the increase in oil prices in the United States. The rise in oil prices has led to inflation in financial markets, which has hit the United States hard, especially the United States, which is already struggling with inflation. Many countries, including the United States, cannot solve the inflation problem by tightening monetary policy, so they can only rely on rising gold prices to curb inflation. The United States and other Western countries imposed sanctions on Russia to exclude it from the SWIFT system. The fallout from the Russian-Ukrainian conflict further contributed to currency volatility. Among them, gold, as a hard currency, is widely recognized for trading around the world, so that it can influence the geopolitical economy of a country's economy. Not only the rise in oil prices, but also other energy crises, imbalances in commodity supply and the reverse demand, and shortages of agricultural products have combined internationalization of the global economy and trade, ultimately leading to inflation. The Russian- Ukrainian conflict and sanctions policy have led to increased uncertainty about global trade and to cause Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Business and Policy Studies DOI: 10.54254/2754-1169/14/20230795 economic repair. Financial sanctions against Russia, adopted by the United States in conjunction with other Western countries, have cut off Russian trade funds with many countries around the world, affecting the settlement of dollar conversions and threatening the safety of the balance sheets of global financial institutions. Cutting off Russia's SWFIT system will result in its inability to pay its debts, which will create the risk of asset losses for the European and American banking sectors [7]. Second, freezing the foreign assets of many Russian banks, entities and individuals will have an impact on global liquidity. So whether it is the state, financial investment institutions or individual investors, based on their own interests, they will take corresponding countermeasures to hedge, and this hedging tool is gold, which affects the rise of gold prices. Affected by the rising price of gold, some gold- related industries have gained more from it, such as gold mining. Due to the rise in the price of gold, the profit of source companies such as mining has greatly increased. So looking at the whole picture, the impact of the Russia-Ukraine conflict on both crude oil and gold prices is on an upward trend in the short to medium term. In addition to the two countries involved, the most affected are European countries. Because they are in high demand for Russian and Ukrainian crude oil and other commodities. At the same time, European countries and Russia and Ukraine have close economic ties in trade and financial system transactions, so they are greatly affected. People's daily lives have also been greatly affected. The Russian-Ukrainian conflict is still developing today, and the prolonged armed conflict has hindered the globalization of the world economy and undermined the now more stable political situation. Even if some industries benefit from it, as a whole, it is not conducive to the development of human society and economic globalization. 3. Conclusion This research is based on the analysis of the factors and results of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict on the world oil and gold prices on the basis of the expanded geopolitical influence. In summary, the analysis shows that the increase in oil prices due to the conflict between Russia and Ukraine is due to the decrease in supply and exports, as well as the disruption of settlement trade. The main reason for the increase in the price of gold is the inflation caused by the increase in the price of oil, which in turn led to the increase in the price of gold as a safe-haven and hard currency. From this incident, we can conclude that the Russian-Ukrainian conflict has had a negative impact and impact on the world economy. But this also objectively motivates us to persist in developing science and technology, developing and utilizing new energy, and developing clean energy. This would also reduce our reliance on oil and other energy sources, develop a diversified economy, stabilize our currency, and avoid geopolitical risk. As investors, we should diversify our investments and focus on areas closely related to future development to minimize investment risks. The conflict between Russia and Ukraine has not only affected the financial markets but also created a food crisis and many social problems, such as: refugees, transportation problems, as well as problems with electricity supply and cultural exchange [8]. All of this has seriously hampered the development of relations between Russia and Ukraine. Therefore, regardless of the final outcome of this conflict, neither country will be the beneficiary, which will have a ripple effect on the development of both economies. This is equally detrimental to the countries' efforts to restore economic order in the post-epidemic era. At the same time, based on the lack of some data and insufficient information sources, the analysis and discussion of the premise elements in this paper are lacking, and the factors of the analysis remain to be considered. In future studies, we will continue to pay attention to this international event, explore as many factors and realistic conditions as possible, and conduct an in-depth study on the response to this impact and the price reduction options. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Business and Policy Studies DOI: 10.54254/2754-1169/14/20230795
The Pro-Russian Conflict and its Impact on Stock Returns in Russia and the Ukraine Manuel Hoffmann Matthias Neuenkirch Research Papers in Economics No. 1/15 The Pro-Russian Conflict and its Impact on Stock Returns in Russia and the Ukraine* Manuel Hoffmann and Matthias Neuenkirch University of Trier This version: 6 January 2015 Corresponding author: Matthias Neuenkirch Department of Economics University of Trier D-54286 Trier Germany Tel.: +49 - 651 - 2012629 Fax: +49 - 651 - 2013934 Email: neuenkirch@uni-trier.de * The usual disclaimer applies. The Pro-Russian Conflict and its Impact on Stock Returns in Russia and the Ukraine Abstract We analyze the impact of the pro-Russian conflict on stock returns in Russia and the Ukraine during the period November 21, 2013 to September 29, 2014. We utilize a newly created indicator for the degree of (de-)escalation based on an Internet search for conflict-related news. We find that intensification of the conflict reduces Russian and Ukrainian stock returns. The (de-)escalation of the pro-Russian conflict in the Ukraine accounts for a total variation of 6.5 (8.7) percentage points in the Russian (Ukrainian) stock market. Keywords: Conflict-Related News, Pro-Russian Conflict, Russia, Sanctions, Stock Returns, Ukraine. JEL: F30, G12, G14, G15. 1. Introduction On November 21, 2013, the then Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych suspended preparations for an Association Agreement and the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement with the European Union. The announcement initiated protests among those favoring stronger ties with the European Union, which, in February 2014 resulted in a change of the Ukrainian government. However, residents of southern and eastern Ukraine demonstrated against this new pro-European administration and eventually began to actually fight for closer ties with the Russian Federation. This pro-Russian conflict in the Ukraine continued to escalate with the Russian Federation's annexation of the Crimea and the consequent sanctions imposed on Russia by the European Union and the United States. As of this writing (January 2015), there is a fragile ceasefire agreement between the Ukrainian government and the pro-Russian powers but the conflict is in no way resolved. Military conflicts have economic implications not only for governments (Barro 1981), households (Ghobarah et al. 2003), and firms (Guidolin and La Ferrara 2007), but also for investors around the world (Collier and Gunning 1995; Rigobon and Sack 2005; Schneider and Troeger 2006; Guidolin and La Ferrara 2010). The mechanism is quite simple: the risk of war increases the risk of assets related to the parties involved in the conflict. Indeed, Rigobon and Sack (2005) find evidence that an increased risk of war results in investors tending to avoid assets related to the antagonists. In this paper, we analyze the impact of the pro-Russian conflict on stock returns in Russia and the Ukraine. Our sample period starts with the beginning of the Euromaidan protests on November 21, 2013 and ends on September 29, 2014, thereby including events such as the Crimea annexation, several stages of EU sanctions, and the shooting down of the MH17 airplane on July 17, 2014. We utilize a newly created indicator for the degree of (de-)escalation based on an Internet search for conflict-related news. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to empirically assess the impact of conflict-related news on stock market returns during the pro-Russian unrest in the Ukraine. To date, Russian financial markets have been studied only in the context of the wars in Chechnya (Hayo and Kutan 2005) and Georgia (Peresetsky 2011). This paper also investigates the possibility that the conflict will inflict medium-term damage to the Russian and Ukrainian economies as stock prices can be used to predict future economic development (Fama 1990; Estrella and Mishkin 1998; Beaudry and Portier 2006; Foresti 2007). The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the dataset and the empirical methodology. Section 3 presents the empirical results. Section 4 concludes. 2. Data and Empirical Methodology We use daily financial data for the period November 21, 2013 to September 29, 2014 and employ as dependent variables the growth rates of the Russian MICEX index and the Ukrainian PFTS index (defined as (cid:1870)(cid:3047) (cid:3404) 100 (cid:1864)(cid:1866) (cid:1868)(cid:3047) (cid:3398) 100 (cid:1864)(cid:1866) (cid:1868)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)). The key challenge in analyzing the impact of conflict-related news on stock returns is finding a suitable indicator for such news. It is well-known that changes in expectations about certain events, such as future (de-)escalation of a conflict or the imposition of sanctions, can lead to a change in investor behavior before the escalation actually occurs or the sanction is implemented. That is, investors--in advance of the expected event-- rearrange their portfolios based on their own assessments of (i) the severity of the conflict and (ii) the likelihood of sanctions. In contrast, actual events, for instance, the formal annexation of the Crimea by the Russian Federation or the announcement of sanctions by the European Union and the United States after lengthy negotiations, may come as no surprise to investors and, therefore, should not lead to a change in asset prices. We take this into account when analyzing the impact of conflict-related news on Russian and Ukrainian stock returns and create an indicator that measures the level of escalation of the pro-Russian unrest. We use the Nexis search database and count all entries on each day for a joint occurrence of the keywords "EU sanctions," "Russia," and "Ukraine." The frequency of occurrence can be used as a proxy for the likelihood of EU sanctions on Russia or, put differently, as an indirect measure of the conflict's escalation level from an investor perspective.1 Figure 1 shows the frequency of EU sanction news (y-axis) during some important events of the pro-Russian conflict in the Ukraine. The first peak in frequency is on March 7, 2014, one day after the Crimean parliament voted on a highly contentious referendum 1 We focus on EU sanctions since EU member states account for about 50 percent of Russian exports and imports. In addition, EU investments make up as much as 75 percent of all foreign direct investment stocks in Russia. Source: European Commission. to join the Russian Federation and Russian troops occupied strategic facilities in the Crimea. The other peaks coincide with the adoption dates of various sanctions and the MH 17 shooting. The figure makes it very clear that the various sanctions could not have been a surprise to financial markets as the frequency of reporting on sanctions increased steadily before each of these peaks. Figure 1: Frequency of EU Sanction News Notes: Figure shows the frequency of EU sanction news (y-axis) during some important events of the pro- Russian conflict in the Ukraine. Source: CSIS (2014) and Nexis search database. To facilitate interpretation of the econometric analysis below we apply a log plus one transformation to the indicator variable measuring the frequency of sanctions. To proxy a true news component from an investor perspective we include the first difference of this transformed indicator as an explanatory variable in our econometric model (D(cid:1857)(cid:1871)(cid:1855)(cid:1853)(cid:1864)(cid:1853)(cid:1872)(cid:1861)(cid:1867)(cid:1866) in Equation (1) below). Other explanatory variables are lagged Russian, Ukrainian, and US (S&P 500) stock market returns, which will test for weak efficiency in Russian and Ukrainian stock markets and for spillover effects from US stock markets. The impact of energy-related news on stock returns (Hayo and Kutan 2005) is captured by the first lag of the Brent spot oil price growth rate. We also take into account the impact of monetary policy on stock returns by using as additional regressors changes in the central bank target rates. Finally, we control for day-of-the-week effects by using four dummy variables with Monday as the reference. Russian and Ukrainian stock returns are characterized by excess kurtosis (MICEX returns: 15.4; PFTS returns: 12.4), indicating ARCH effects (Engle 1982). Consequently, we employ an EGARCH(1,1) model (Nelson 1991) for both dependent variables, which corrects for the kurtosis, skewness, and time-varying volatility of the asset price and allows for the asymmetric effects of positive and negative innovations in the conditional variance. The general specification is as follows: (cid:4666)1(cid:4667) (cid:1870)(cid:3047) (cid:3019)(cid:3022)(cid:3020)(cid:1867)(cid:1870) (cid:1870)(cid:3047) (cid:3022)(cid:3012)(cid:3019) (cid:3404) (cid:2009) (cid:3397) (cid:2010)(cid:2869)(cid:1872)(cid:1873)(cid:1857)(cid:3047) (cid:3397) (cid:2010)(cid:2870)(cid:1875)(cid:1857)(cid:1856)(cid:3047) (cid:3397) (cid:2010)(cid:2871)(cid:1872)(cid:1860)(cid:1873)(cid:3047) (cid:3397) (cid:2010)(cid:2872)(cid:1858)(cid:1870)(cid:1861)(cid:3047) (cid:3397) (cid:2011)(cid:2869)(cid:1870)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3019)(cid:3022)(cid:3020) (cid:3397) (cid:2011)(cid:2870)(cid:1870)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3022)(cid:3020) (cid:3022)(cid:3012)(cid:3019) (cid:3397) (cid:2011)(cid:2871)(cid:1870)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3397) (cid:2011)(cid:2872)(cid:1870)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3016)(cid:3010)(cid:3013) (cid:3397) (cid:2012)(cid:2869)D(cid:1861)(cid:3047) (cid:3019)(cid:3022)(cid:3020) (cid:3397) (cid:2012)(cid:2870)D(cid:1861)(cid:3047) (cid:3022)(cid:3012)(cid:3019) (cid:3397) (cid:2014)(cid:1986)(cid:1857)(cid:1871)(cid:1855)(cid:1853)(cid:1864)(cid:1853)(cid:1872)(cid:1861)(cid:1867)(cid:1866)(cid:3047) (cid:3397) (cid:2013)(cid:3047) We assume that (cid:2013)(cid:3047) (cid:3404) (cid:3493)(cid:1860)(cid:3047)(cid:1874)(cid:3047), where (cid:1874)(cid:3047) is an i.i.d. sequence with zero mean and unit variance. Therefore, the conditional variance (cid:1860)(cid:3047) can be expressed as a function of the lagged standardized innovations (cid:2013)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)/(cid:1860)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) and the lagged conditional variance (cid:1860)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869): (cid:4666)2(cid:4667) (cid:1864)(cid:1866)(cid:4666)(cid:1860)(cid:3047)(cid:4667) (cid:3404) (cid:2036) (cid:3397) (cid:2016)(cid:2869)|(cid:2013)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)/(cid:1860)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)| (cid:3397) (cid:2016)(cid:2870)(cid:2013)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)/(cid:1860)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3397) (cid:2016)(cid:2871)(cid:1864)(cid:1866)(cid:4666)(cid:1860)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)(cid:4667) Equations (1) and (2) are simultaneously estimated by maximum likelihood. 3. Empirical Results Table 1 sets out the results of a simultaneous estimation of Equations (1) and (2) for Russian stock market returns (left panel) and Ukrainian stock market returns (right panel). Starting with the financial control variables we first observe that the weak efficiency condition is violated as past Russian (Ukrainian) returns are useful in predicting today's MICEX (PFTS) returns. Second, we find some evidence of international spillover effects as a 1 percentage point (pp) increase in lagged S&P 500 returns leads to a 36 basis points (bps) increase in Russian returns. Higher lagged Russian returns have a positive impact on the Ukrainian stock returns as well (3 bps after a 1 pp increase). In contrast, a 1 pp increase in lagged Ukrainian returns and in lagged US returns reduces the MICEX growth rate by 6 bps and the PFTS growth rate by 7 bps, respectively. Finally, daily oil price fluctuations affect both stock markets similarly as 1 pp increase decreases the MICEX returns by 17 bps and the PFTS returns by 16 bps. Table 1: Explaining Stock Returns in Russia and the Ukraine Coef. (cid:2009) (cid:2010)(cid:2869): (cid:1872)(cid:1873)(cid:1857)(cid:3047) (cid:2010)(cid:2870): (cid:1875)(cid:1857)(cid:1856)(cid:3047) (cid:2010)(cid:2871): (cid:1872)(cid:1860)(cid:1873)(cid:3047) (cid:2010)(cid:2872): (cid:1858)(cid:1870)(cid:1861)(cid:3047) (cid:3019)(cid:3022)(cid:3020) (cid:2011)(cid:2869): (cid:1870)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3022)(cid:3012)(cid:3019) (cid:2011)(cid:2870): (cid:1870)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3022)(cid:3020) (cid:2011)(cid:2871): (cid:1870)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3016)(cid:3010)(cid:3013) (cid:2011)(cid:2872): (cid:1870)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3019)(cid:3022)(cid:3020) (cid:2012)(cid:2869): D(cid:1861)(cid:3047) (cid:3022)(cid:3012)(cid:3019) (cid:2012)(cid:2870): D(cid:1861)(cid:3047) (cid:2014): (cid:1986)(cid:1857)(cid:1871)(cid:1855)(cid:1853)(cid:1864)(cid:1853)(cid:1872)(cid:1861)(cid:1867)(cid:1866)(cid:3047) (cid:2036) (cid:2016)(cid:2869): |(cid:2013)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)/(cid:1860)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)| (cid:2016)(cid:2870): (cid:2013)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)/(cid:1860)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:2016)(cid:2871): (cid:1864)(cid:1866)(cid:4666)(cid:1860)(cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)(cid:4667) Observations Pseudo R2 ARCH 1-2 test AR 1-5 test Notes: Results of simultaneous estimation of Equations (1) and (2) using maximum likelihood. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity consistent (Bollerslev and Wooldridge 1992). Ukraine: PFTS Returns. Std. Err. (0.008) (0.224) (0.020) (0.192) (0.016) (0.017) (0.006) (0.009) (0.010) (1.620) (0.314) (0.013) (0.155) (0.237) (0.196) (0.163) F(2,175) = 0.68 [0.51] Chi2(5) = 4.60 [0.47] Russia: MICEX Returns Std. Err. (0.202) (0.284) (0.240) (0.200) (0.239) (0.033) (0.008) (0.021) (0.028) (0.963) (0.136) (0.013) (0.035) (0.141) (0.073) (0.096) F(2,175) = 0.90 [0.41] Chi2(5) = 5.20 [0.39] p-value [0.62] [0.77] [0.89] [0.13] [0.75] [0.01] [0.00] [0.00] [0.00] [0.00] [0.00] [0.00] [0.38] [0.04] [0.01] [0.00] p-value [0.00] [0.02] [0.00] [0.05] [0.00] [0.09] [0.01] [0.74] [0.00] [0.31] [0.03] [0.35] [0.00] Coef. Both the Central Bank of Russia and the National Bank of Ukraine increased their target rate several times during the sample period in an effort to stabilize their currencies. Russian interest rate hikes drastically reduce stock returns in both economies as a 1 pp increase in the target rate leads to a 5.8 pp decrease in the Russian stock market returns and a 4.2 pp drop in Ukrainian returns. Interest rate changes by the National Bank of Ukraine do have an impact on Russian returns (-92 bps after a 1 pp increase) but not on the domestic stock market. Escalation of the conflict is bad news for both stock markets as Russian returns go down by 6 bps and Ukrainian returns decrease by 8 bps; the impact is statistically equal in both economies (t = 1.08 [0.28]). To provide an approximation of the overall impact of positive and negative conflict-related news on stock market variation in both economies we multiply the cumulative absolute changes of the escalation indicator by the coefficients in Table 1. The (de-)escalation of the pro-Russian conflict in the Ukraine accounts for a total variation of 6.52 pp in the Russian stock market and 8.73 pp in the Ukrainian stock market. Finally, we observe a significant leverage effect in the Russian stock market as negative innovations lead to higher volatility than do positive ones, whereas (cid:2016)(cid:2870) is found to be insignificant for the PFTS returns. 4. Conclusions In this paper, we analyze the impact of the pro-Russian conflict on stock returns in Russia and the Ukraine during the period November 21, 2013 to September 29, 2014. We utilize a newly created indicator for the degree of (de-)escalation based on an Internet search for conflict-related news. We find that intensification of the conflict reduces Russian and Ukrainian stock returns. The (de-)escalation of the pro-Russian conflict in the Ukraine accounts for a total variation of 6.5 (8.7) percentage points in the Russian (Ukrainian) stock market.
Anna Hlazova UDC 339.7, 336.7, 330.322 JEL Classification: F30, G11, G15, G23 DOI: 10.15587/2706-5448.2021.248124 Article type <<Reports on Research Projects>> RESEARCHING THE PROBLEMS OF DIGITAL ECONOMY DEVELOPMENT AS AN INDICATOR OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY: POTENTIAL THREATS AND PROSPECTS The object of the paper is peculiarities of digital economy development in the framework of informatization of socio-economic, socio-cultural relations. It contributes to the in-depth development of the noosphere, the emergence of new industries and a qualitative transformation of production and distribution relations. The paper examines the impact of digitalization on transformational changes in the economy. As noted at the 14th G20 Summit, the main goals of digitalization are the development of innovations, focused on the development of society 5.0, ensur- ing the free flow of data and at the same time solving problems, related to information security and the protection of intellectual property rights, as well as bridging the digital gap and promoting the digitalization of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises and the development of smart cities. The research methodology is based on theoretical and methodological analysis of the literature, statistical, comparative analysis, as well as synthesis, generalization and systems analysis. The study has revealed differences between the national approach and world experience in the interpretation of digitalization. For instance, in Ukraine the phenomenon involves, first of all, <<digitization>> in the field of data collection and analysis. At the same time, the concept of digitalization in developed countries is considered as the modernization of the manufacturing sector based on the implementation of information and communication tech- nologies in order to reduce the capital and material intensity of products to increase competitiveness. In addition, the level of development of central bank digital currencies (CBDC) as one of the indicators of the information society has been analyzed. As a result, it was found, that about 80 % of all central banks in the world have been working on projects to issue their own digital currency. The basic requirements for national CBDC have been systematized. The practical significance, presented in the paper, lies in making recommendations for policy implementation of national economy digitalization. It is important, first of all, to <<digitize>> the real manufacturing sector, but not only create all sorts of <<remote access services>>, clearly define the government position on cryptocurrencies and continue to implement the project of e-hryvnia (digital currency of National Bank of Ukraine) introduction. Keywords: digitalization of the economy, information society, central bank digital currencies (CBDC), innova- tive development. Received date: 03.08.2021 Accepted date: 16.09.2021 Published date: 23.12.2021 How to cite (c) The Author(s) 2021 This is an open access article under the Creative Commons CC BY license Hlazova, A. (2021). Researching the problems of digital economy development as an indicator of the information society: potential threats and prospects. Technology Audit and Production Reserves, 6 (4 (62)), 37-39. doi: https://doi.org/10.15587/2706-5448.2021.248124 1. Introduction The global environment of the information economy is determined by the post-industrial phase of civilizational development, characterized by the continuous improve- ment of information and communication technologies. In such conditions, digitalization (introduction of digi- tal technologies) is defined as a constant process of functional transformation of the economic order, based on the introduction of innovations. In turn, innovative development is a factor of qualitative economic trans- formation. According to the Global Innovation Index 2020 Report [1], which compares innovation activities of 131 countries and economies of the world, leaders of innovative development are Switzerland, Sweden, USA, and Great Britain. For example, Ukraine is ranked 45-th in the Global Innovation Index 2020, and has been en- tered the TOP-2 countries of the lower-middle income group. It should be noted, that innovative development, as one of digitalization factors, is a matter of govern- TECHNOLOGY AUDIT AND PRODUCTION RESERVES -- No. 6/4(62), 2021PROBLEMS OF MACROECONOMICS AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ment interest. It determines the relevance of studying the digital economy problem. Thus, the object of the research is digital economy pecu- liarities in terms of informatization of socio-economic, socio- cultural ties, which contributes to the in-depth development of the noosphere, the emergence of new industries and qualitative transformation of production and distribution relations. The aim of the paper is to study the features of digitalization, its key aspects as well as differences in the implementation of the concept of digital economy in developed countries and, for instance, in Ukraine. 2. Methods of research To the theoretical and methodological basis belong modern economics views, works of leading scientists in the field of digitalization of the economy. In the process of performing the investigation, modern research methods were used, namely: - method of theoretical generalization, historical and logi- cal methods, systematic approach (to study the theoreti- cal foundations of digitalization in the global economy); - methods of analysis and synthesis, method of functional and structural analysis (to assess the manifestations of central banks digital currencies (CBDC) introduction); - statistical methods (for analysis and assessment of the dynamics of the innovative technologies introduction); - methods of scientific abstraction, induction and de- duction (to determine ways to transform the national economic system in the context of digitalization). 3. Research results and discussion Digitization (introduction of digital technologies) in the conditions of information society existence is defined as a constant process of functional transformation of an economic system. In other words, it is the implementation of infor- mation and communication technologies (ICT) in different segments of the economy, both at the national and global levels. It is determined by the <<fourth industrial revolu- tion>>. The concept of Industry 4.0 involves fully automated production, which is controlled in real time, taking into ac- count the effects of external conditions. The world's leading industrial countries (such as the United States, Germany, Italy, Japan, etc.) understand the concept of digital economy as a process of creating and using unified production and service systems [2]. In Ukraine, digitalization is focused on the introduction of new services. Such digitization is based on the data collection and analysis and does not cover the problem of radical change in the production system. It does not include the question of production, marketing and op- eration, which is enshrined in the concept of Industry 4.0. It should be noted, that the size of global digital economy is estimated at 4.5 to 15.5 % of world GDP [3]. About 40 % of the added value, created in the global information and communication technology (ICT) sector, is formed by the United States and China. Regarding Ukraine, the digitalization of the industry has shown a negative dynamics of development. The technologi- cal lag is critical for the Ukrainian economy, as the process of implementing Industry 3.0 has not yet been completed. Even the level of automation in Ukrainian industry is still below average. For example, in metallurgy it is about 50 %. Therefore, the problem of rapid transition from the level of Industry 3.0 to Industry 4.0 is very acute. The level of digitalization of Ukraine's economy differs significantly depending on the specific industry. In particular, the level of use of digital technologies (automation, robotics) in the mining industry is very low. This leads to a significant gap in terms of labor productivity in the industry [4]. It should be admitted, that the innovation vector of state development, namely public spending on innovation, is a modern indicator of the information society. According to the State Statistics Service [5], in 2019 it was spent on: - innovations of the enterprise approximately 526.7 mil- lion USD, including the purchase of machinery, equip- ment and software - 377.22 million USD; - internal and external research and development - 108.10 million USD; - for the acquisition of other external knowledge (ac- quisition of new technologies) - 1.38 million USD; - other work, related to the creation and implementa- tion of innovations (other costs) - 39.97 million USD. The costs share in 2019 for the purchase of machinery, equipment and software, compared to 2018, has been increased from 68.1 to 71.6 %. At the same time, the expenditures share on research and development (R&D) decreased from 26.3 % in 2018 to 20.5 % in 2019, the acquisition of other external knowledge has been decreased from 0.4 in 2018 to 0.3 % in 2019. At the same time, the share of other expenses increased, including marketing and advertising from 5.2 to 7.6 % [5]. At that time, according to the Global Innovation 100 Report, the total expenditure of the world's 1,000 largest companies on research and de- velopment (R&D) in 2019 reached 702 billion USD. The R&D spending leaders are Amazon (16.1 billion USD) and Volkswagen (12.5 billion USD) [6]. The State Statistics Service points out that there is a direct tie between the size of an enterprise and the level of innovation. Cur- rently, the volume of funding for innovation in Ukraine is less than 1 % of GDP (Fig. 1), while in the EU this figure is about 2.14 %. It has a negative impact on the digital transformation and modernization of the economy. 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 % of GDP USD mln Fig. 1. The amount of funding for innovation in Ukraine [5] Another modern indicator of information society devel- opment and digitalization of the economy is Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDS) introduction, as transactions are much faster and the commission is virtually absent. It should be noted that, conceptually, digital money is defined as currency based on blockchain technology, but it is issued by the national central bank and is a legal tender in the country. CBDS differs from conventional MACROECONOMICS: PROBLEMS OF MACROECONOMICS AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTTECHNOLOGY AUDIT AND PRODUCTION RESERVES -- No. 6/4(62), 2021ISSN 2664-9969 cryptocurrencies, as the latter are not issued by the gov- ernment and do not have the status of legal tender in the country. CBDS effectively performs the functions of fiduciary money, i. e. is a means of circulation. The main requirements for the creation of CBDS are set out in the Bank for International Settlements Report [7]. In particular, it is noted, that digital currencies of central banks cannot harm monetary and financial stability, as the main purpose of digital currency is to promote innova- tion and efficiency of settlements, coexisting with cash forms of settlement. There can be no single standard for CBDS creating due to different national priorities and conditions, but it must be at least: - stable and safe to maintain working capacity; - convenient and affordable (free or at a low price) for end users; - maintain appropriate standards and be regulated by a clear legal framework; - to promote competition in the market and the de- velopment of innovations. Regarding the countries experience in CBDS intro- duction, we emphasize that in 2020 China conducted the largest tests of digital currency (initiated the distribution of the digital yuan for a total of about 1.5 million USD). Developments in this area are being conducted by Sin- gapore (Ubin), Canada (Jasper), South Africa (Khokha), Sweden (E-krona), Uruguay (E-peso) and others. Accord- ing to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Re- port [8], about 80 % of surveyed central banks have been working on projects to issue their own digital currency. The European Central Bank (ECB) is also launching a pilot project on the <<digital euro>> [9]. In test mode, the digital euro will rotate for two years. During this time, a number of tasks have to be solved: the main one is to ensure security and privacy. This should effectively combat money laundering and tax evasion. The digital euro will allow eurozone residents to place deposits di- rectly in the ECB. This option is usually only available for commercial lenders, governments and other central banks. The ECB notes that the new type of currency will complement the traditional one, but it won't replace it. In Ukraine, the introduction of e-hryvnia began in 2016. The e-hryvnia will not need expensive intermediar- ies in the form of banks, as operations will take place on NBU (the National Bank of Ukraine) servers. Issuance of e-hryvnia is much less risk in comparison with placing money in a commercial bank (no need to worry about the bankruptcy of a commercial bank). It is assumed, that the e-hryvnia can be used, for example, to pay subsidies for utilities and other social assistance. According to the developers of e-hryvnia project, it will simplify the control over cash flows that are allocated from the state budget [10]. Deepening digitalization in all areas leads to the optimi- zation of the economic system, but the more the economy is <<digitized>>, the more the problem of cybersecurity and data protection need to be solved. 4. Conclusions The paper revealed differences between the national approach to the interpretation of digitalization concepts and global experience. Developed countries, first of all, focus on the digitalization of production, while in developing countries, as exemplified by Ukraine, digitalization is developing in the form of <<remote access services>>. This trend is confirmed by the dynamics of low investment activity in the field of innovation (below 1 % of GDP) and the backwardness of the industrial sector. It was also determined, that the current trend of the information society and the digitalization of social and economic relations is CBDC project implementation (about 80 % of surveyed central banks have been working on developing their own national digital currencies). The advantages of CBDC based on blockchain technology are instant transactions as well as low cost. A comparative analysis showed that the main pur- poses of CBDC introduction are the instantaneousness of transactions and low transaction costs. Talking about Ukraine, the national digital currency is currently consid- ered as an instrument of control over earmarked funds. The findings can be interested to scientists who have been studying digital economy peculiarities as well as rel- evant government institutions, dealing with the problems of digital transformation of Ukraine's economy.
MARINE CORPS UNIVERSITY BGen Maura M. Hennigan, USMC President Col Mark R. Reid, USMC Chief of Staff SgtMaj Stephen J. Lutz, USMC Sergeant Major of MCU EDITORIAL STAFF Ms. Angela J. Anderson Director, MCU Press Mr. Jason Gosnell Managing Editor/Deputy Director Ms. Stephani L. Miller Manuscript Editor Mr. Christopher N. Blaker Manuscript Editor ADVISORY BOARD Dr. Rebecca J. Johnson Provost Marine Corps University Col Mary H. Reinwald, USMC (Ret) Editor, Leatherneck Magazine Col Christopher Woodbridge, USMC (Ret) Editor, Marine Corps Gazette Col Jon Sachrison, USMC (Ret) COO, MCU Foundation SCHOOLHOUSE DIRECTORS Colonel Greg Poland, USMC School of Advanced Warfare Colonel James W. Lively, USMC Expeditionary Warfare School Colonel Brian Sharp, USMC Marine Corps War College Colonel Andrew R. Winthrop, USMC Command and Staff College Journal of Advanced Military Studies (Print) ISSN 2770-2596 (Online) ISSN 2770-260X DIS C LAIMER The views expressed in the articles and reviews in this journal are solely those of the authors. They do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the organizations for which they work, Marine Corps University, the U.S. Marine Corps, the De- partment of the Navy, or the U.S. government. When necessary, errata will be published imme- diately following the book reviews. MCUP prod- ucts are published under a Creative Commons NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 Internation- al (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) license. Established in 2008, MCU Press is an open access publisher that recognizes the importance of an open dialogue between scholars, policy makers, analysts, and military leaders and of crossing civilian-military boundaries to advance knowl- edge and solve problems. To that end, MCUP launched the Journal of Advanced Military Studies (JAMS) to provide a forum for interdisciplinary discussion of national security and international relations issues and how they have an impact on the Department of Defense, the Department of the Navy, and the U.S. Marine Corps directly and indirectly. JAMS is published biannually, with oc- casional special issues that highlight key topics of interest. AR TIC LE SUBMIS SIONS The editors are looking for academic articles in the areas of international relations, geopo- litical issues, national security and policy, and cyber security. To submit an article or to learn more about our submission guidelines, please email MCU_Press@usmcu.edu. BO OK REVIEWS Send an email with a brief description of your in- terests to MCU_Press@usmcu.edu. SUB SCRIPTIONS Subscriptions to JAMS are free. To join our sub- scription list or to obtain back issues of the jour- nal, send your mailing address to MCU_Press@ usmcu.edu. AD D RESS CHA NGE Send address updates to MCU_Press@usmcu. edu to maintain uninterrupted delivery. I ND E XING The journal is indexed by ProjectMUSE, Scopus, ScienceOpen, EBSCO, ProQuest, Elsevier, OCLC ArticleFirst, Defense Technical Information Cen- ter, Journal Seek, IBZ Online, British Library Sys- tem, Lancaster Index to Defense and International Security Literature, and AU Library Index to Mili- tary Periodicals. FREELY AVAILABLE AT WWW.USMCU.EDU/MCUPRESS Contents From the Editor RUS SIA, NA TO, AND TH E W AR IN U KRA INE Russia's War in Ukraine: Two Decisive Factors Gilbert W. Merkx, PhD Russia's Nuclear Strategy: Changes or Continuities Arushi Singh Vol. 14, No. 2 Enemy at the Gates: A Strategic Cultural Analysis of Russian Approaches to Conflict in the Information Domain Nicholas H. Vidal Revisiting the Global Posture Review: A New U.S. Approach to European Defense and NATO in a Post-Ukraine War World Major Maxwell Stewart, USMC The Ethical Character of Russia's Offensive Cyber Operations in Ukraine: Testing the Principle of Double Effect Lieutenant Ian A. Clark, USN The Cold War Computer Arms Race Captain Bryan Leese, USN, PhD The Devil's Advocate: An Argument for Moldova and Ukraine to Seize Transnistria Anthony Roney II Tackling Russian Gray Zone Approaches in the Post-Cold War Era Major Ryan Burkholder, USA Journal of Advanced Military Studies Plan Z: Reassessing Security-Based Accounts of Russia's Invasion of Ukraine Alex Hughes The Russian Bloodletting Strategy in the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War: From Success to Hubris Spyridon N. Litsas, PhD Substitute to War: Questioning the Efficacy of Sanctions on Russia Brent Lawniczak, PhD B OO K REVI EWS Dying to Learn: Wartime Lessons from the Western Front By Michael A. Hunzeker Reviewed by Don Thieme, PhD Intelligence in the National Security Enterprise: An Introduction By Roger Z. George Reviewed by James A. Bowden The Islamic State in Africa: The Emergence, Evolution, and Future of the Next Jihadist Battlefront By Jason Warner et al. Reviewed by Whitney Grespin, PhD Managing Sex in the U.S. Military: Gender, Identity, and Behavior By Beth Bailey et al. Reviewed by Joel Blaxland Power & Complacency: American Survival in an Age of International Competition By Phillip T. Lohaus Reviewed by Major Mark A. Capansky Jr., USMCR Russian Practices of Governance in Eurasia: Frontier Power Dynamics, Sixteenth Century to Nineteenth Century By Gulnar T. Kendirbai Reviewed by Victoria Clement, PhD Contents The Combat Soldier. Infantry Tactics and Cohesion in the Twentieth and Twenty-First Centuries By Anthony King Reviewed by Gillis Kersting The Ledger: Accounting for Failure in Afghanistan By David Kilcullen and Greg Mills Reviewed by Major Robert D. Billard Jr., USMC The Third Option: Covert Action and American Foreign Policy By Loch K. Johnson Reviewed by Anthony Marcum To Risk it All: Nine Conflicts and the Crucible of Decision By Admiral James Stavridis, USN (Ret) Reviewed by Lieutenant Colonel Richard A. McConnell, USA (Ret) The Trillion Dollar War: The U.S. Effort to Rebuild Afghanistan, 1999-2021 By Abid Amiri Reviewed by Sangit Sarita Dwivedi Book ReviewsVol. 14, No. 2 The Cold War Computer Arms Race Captain Bryan Leese, USN, PhD Abstract: The Cold War computer arms race illustrates the military's role in strategic competition. The Soviets bought and stole, versus creating computer technology themselves. A U.S.-led coalition integrated economic, diplomatic, and information mechanisms, embargoing computer technology to disadvan- tage the Soviets. President Ronald W. Reagan's offset strategy integrated mil- itary power, openly demonstrating computer-infused weapons lethality that jeopardized Soviet quantitative military advantage. President Reagan's use of the computer arms race shows a way to conduct and integrate a strategic com- petition campaign of deterrence that includes coercive diplomacy with diplo- matic efforts that can deter China and Russia while encouraging them to reverse harmful foreign and domestic policies. Keywords: Cold War, competition, computers, deterrence, coercion, technolo- gy, embargo, industrial espionage In 1992, former assistant secretary of defense Leslie H. Gelb recalled an off- the-record conversation with Chief of the Soviet General Staff Marshal Ni- kolai V. Ogarkov that had taken place in 1983. The plainspoken, hardline general of the Soviet state made it clear that, in his opinion, the Cold War was essentially over. In Ogarkov's mind, Gelb recalled, the West had won because [The] numbers of [Soviet] troops and weapons mean little, he said. We cannot equal the quality of U.S. arms for a generation or two. Modern military power is based upon technology, and technology is based upon computers. In the U.S., he continued, small children--even before they begin school--play with computers. Computers are everywhere in America. Here, we don't even have computers in every office of the Capt Bryan Leese is a career intelligence officer and former military professor in the Joint Military Operations department at the U.S. Naval War College. He holds a master's in strategic studies from the U.S. Army War College and a PhD in war studies from King's College London. https:// orcid.org/0009-0001-7043-6235. Journal of Advanced Military Studies vol. 14, no. 2 Fall 2023 www.usmcu.edu/mcupress https://doi.org/10.21140/mcuj.20231402006 Defense Ministry. And for reasons you know well, we cannot make computers widely available in our society. Then came his portentous punch line: We will never be able to catch up with you in modern arms until we have an economic revolution. And the question is whether we can have an economic revolution without a political revolution.1 Ogarkov recognized that within the competition that defined the Cold War, the Soviets had lost the computer arms race to the United States. Without comput- ers, no number of men or weapons could overcome the United States' asym- metrical technologic advantages. This article examines the competition over computer technology during the Cold War. It highlights the importance of technology in shaping competi- tive strategies and illustrates some of the military's role in a successful, integrat- ed strategic competition campaign. The Cold War computer arms race provides context for current and future competition with China and Russia. The Problem Ogarkov's Cold War observation regarding competition is prescient today. See- ing peace and war as binary conditions does not help us understand the great power competition (GPC) with China and Russia. Peace does not exist, just the absence of war. Competition, some cooperation, and the fear of a possible conflict are the reality. The U.S. Joint force is shifting to a strategic competi- tion paradigm that better fits today's reality by leveraging its dominance in the technology arena.2 However, the United States' technical superiority in con- ventional and nuclear weapons has lessened. China is now considered a peer military threat. The United States is increasing its emphasis on research and development of artificial intelligence and autonomous unmanned weapons systems, among other technologies, to grow the capabilities gap between it and China. At the same time, the United States must control technology transfer to slow China, Russia, and others. But the U.S. defense acquisition system is seen as too slow and its controls too weak. Even its recent efforts, like the Adaptive Acquisition Framework, to speed up weapon system development and deployment have yet to significantly increase the United States' technological comparative ad- vantage.3 China's technology and weapon systems development keeps pace by supplementing its efforts with academic and economic espionage. A recent New York Times article reported a multiyear FBI investigation ex- posing a pervasive, systematic, and vast "economic espionage offensive . . . waged unilaterally by China" against U.S. military technology companies.4 Economic and academic espionage is a strategic competition mechanism, leveraging theft to shorten technology development and fielding time lines. The technologically advanced side's desire to manage competition escalation through cooperation often makes theft possible. Finding ways to cooperate on a narrow set of com- mon interest areas, like medical technologies or fighting climate change, re- LeeseVol. 14, No. 2 duces pressure in military and economic competition areas prone to escalation. However, the cooperation aids in technology transfer and theft. Today's Chinese industrial espionage appears eerily like the Soviet Union's during the Cold War. As seen with detente, the United States' desire to use academic and economic cooperation created Soviet access to dual civilian and military use technologies. And the Soviets, like the Chinese today, benefited especially from access to the computer and digital technologies. The United States' technology dealings with China in the twenty-first century seem to have forgotten the 1970s and 1980s Cold War computer arms race lessons.5 The Cold War Computer Competition Begins Following the Second World War, the U.S. Navy reflected on the difficulty of air defense battle management during Japanese kamikaze air attacks. They realized that air defense in the jet age was untenable without automation. The Navy blended technologies from cryptography, analog gunnery computers, and the calculation of ballistic missile trajectories to create a series of information management computers called the Naval Tactical Data System (NTDS) for air battle management.6 At the same time, the U.S. Air Force worked to create an integrated ear- ly warning and national air defense battle management system called the Semi- Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE). NTDS and SAGE devel- oped intercomputer and teletype datalinks, improving human-to and com- puter-to-computer interaction. The two programs forged links with military research laboratories, commercial industry, and academic institutions that de- veloped, built, and evolved computers. Throughout the 1950s, the collabora- tion produced the transistor, the integrated circuit (computer chip), the printed circuit card, and the Univac series of computers. The continually miniaturized computers using newly developed materials and techniques made them fit into ships and aircraft.7 The civilian-academic-military development provided tech- nologies that International Business Machines Corporation (IBM), Control Data Corporation (CDC), and Honeywell adapted for commercial business and industry use. In 1959, the Department of Defense created the Advanced Research Proj- ects Agency (ARPA) to exploit advanced ballistic missile defense and nucle- ar test detection technology. The space mission shifted to the newly created National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). ARPA focused on computer "internetting" (or what we call networking today) technology.8 Net- working computers increased the overall computing power available and al- lowed data sharing. The 1962 Cuban missile crisis showed that the inability to share data across the national and military command and control (C2) systems almost resulted in a nuclear weapons conflict. The 1960s effort to consolidate and internet C2 systems created the Worldwide Military Command and Con- trol System (WWMCCS, pronounced Wimex). The theory critical to the success of networking was "distributed commu- The Cold War Computer Arms RaceJournal of Advanced Military Studies nication," proposed by Paul Baran at Rand in the early 1960s.9 The human brain, Baran observed, overcame damage to the neural network by rerouting messages across its distributed pathways. He argued that a computer network could do the same by breaking messages into many blocks. Each block had an identity or handover code and destination address. The blocks were stored and forwarded through the "shortest instantaneously available path through the net- work." Baran dubbed the store and forward approach as "hot-potato" heuristic routing. As the blocks arrived, the message was reassembled using the handover code.10 ARPA's network project (ARPANET) focused on expanding computer time-sharing using distributed communication networks.11 Baran widely published his research and simulations. His concepts were radical, disruptive thinking that challenged the current voice and data transmis- sion approach. It took several years before the concepts were adopted.12 Finally, on 29 October 1969, two computer nodes, one at Stanford Research Institute (SRI), Menlo Park, CA, and another at UCLA's Boelter Hall, Portola Plaza, Los Angeles, CA, some 563 kilometers apart, were able to internet. Today's World Wide Web (WWW), a global system of interconnected computer networks, was born with the simple networking of those two computers. In the 1970s, 80s, and 90s, the U.S. and Western computer industries pro- duced more and more computers, making them smaller, more powerful, and more connected. The West's computer industry validated the increasing rate of technology growth that Gordon E. Moore, the cofounder of Fairchild Semicon- ductor and Intel, posited in 1965.13 In the Soviet Bloc, however, the computer industry lagged and struggled. Soviet Cybernetics Development Computer science theories, called cybernetic theories in the post-Second World War era, were pitched to top Soviet party leaders and condemned as a capitalist plot.14 Soviet military and economic planners, however, recognized the need for computers. It was a conundrum Ogarkov alluded to in his 1983 statement to Gleb. In classic Soviet doublespeak, the Soviets secretly pursued military com- puting while "condemning the West for doing the same."15 After the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953, cybernetics slowly returned to the academic institution and Russian industry. Nikita Khrushchev broke with Stalin's isolationism in the mid-1950s. Khrushchev felt that Stalin had culled many specialists needed to grow the economy. Under his de-Stalinization poli- cy, Khrushchev somewhat liberalized society and reformed the Soviet industrial infrastructure. The problem with the economy, Khrushchev believed, was the oppressive centralization of its management. His policies looked to undo the party hierarchy by promoting specialists and creative thinkers above long-term party members.16 Khrushchev's new policies had some initial success. The sale of consumer goods grew and so did the Soviet economy. Increased weapons sales to the Third World improved the economy while increasing Soviet influence and spreading LeeseVol. 14, No. 2 Communism. Budget reductions were also needed, and Khrushchev cut mili- tary manpower by 5.7 million from 1956 through 1957. He also increased the production of new technologies. Even with these changes, by 1959, the opti- mism that the Soviet economy would "bury" capitalism, as Khrushchev had ex- claimed at a 1956 embassy reception in Moscow, was fading inside the party.17 Khrushchev believed he needed to decentralize economic policy making fur- ther. He removed the planning from the Kremlin, pushing it down to regional economic planning subcommittees. However, decentralization only works if the regional subcommittees share production and economic planning data. To do so required using cybernetics, the computers and integrated networks that Stalin had been against.18 The widespread administrative decentralization was anathema to the Soviet system. University of Tulsa professor Benjamin Peters argued that the decentral- ization contributed to the derailment of the Soviet cybernetic efforts. By mar- ginalizing many party officials, the decentralization "further contribute[d to] the disarray and discontent associated with his [Khrushchev's] leadership." By the 1962 Cuban crisis, the Soviet national economy remained lethargic, and the "information management behind its planning were proving increasingly inad- equate."19 Disenfranchised top-party members took every opportunity to derail decentralization and the effort to "carry out wide-scale cybernetic structural reforms." Seeing that his reforms were not working, Khrushchev found that decentralization left him "without the control over the very reforms he wished to enact. "20 Though the Russian cyber science that led the cybernetic structural reform effort was solid, Peters argues, its demise was due to the unregulated internal competition between top party leaders for primacy.21 Like the Americans, the Soviet military used computers to improve stra- tegic warning and decision-making. Unlike the American's Wimex, the Soviet military created three separate warning and C2 networks for air defense, mis- sile defense, and space surveillance. The three Soviet systems tried to match the centralized U.S. Air Force's SAGE. However, they chose instead to develop three unconnected systems.22 A 1972 U.S. national intelligence estimate (NIE) reported that the Soviet ballistic missile warning network provided only negligi- ble capability and "show[ed] no prospect of becoming effective against a major attack." The air defense network was better, providing a "formidable defense." The space surveillance system could track and likely intercept orbital satellites.23 Soviet cybernetics was a series of "stovepipe" efforts limiting the collaboration required for large-scale computer production and implementation. Soviet military cybernetics innovator Anatoly I. Kitov's efforts to break the "stovepipes" illustrate the shortcomings of the Soviet's effort. In 1956, Kitov proposed an ARPANET-like nationwide internet network, though it differed in the details of its design. In a 1959 report meant to go directly to Khrushchev, Kitov recommended that the military share its information management sys- tems to improve civilian economic planning through internet-connected com- puters. The military dismissed Kitov's recommendation, removed him as the The Cold War Computer Arms RaceJournal of Advanced Military Studies director of Computational Center-1 of the Ministry of Defense, and revoked his party membership for good measure.24 The Soviet system continued to privilege highly classified military cyber- netic efforts by defense ministries and institutions while isolating efforts by the civilian sector. There was no governing body to force cybernetic coopera- tion between the organizations. Khrushchev's reform had unwittingly created ministries and institutions "not only unwilling to cooperate . . . [but] often in hostile competition with their peer institutions."25 Thus, Soviet cybernetic the- ories grew slowly, but throughout the 1960s, their practical application and the creation of a civilian computer industry lagged behind the West's. Buy and Steal In the Spring of 1970, the Communist Party realized they required more and better computers to compete with the West. The State Planning Committee (Gosplan) released a five-year economic plan directing a 260 percent increase in computer production. The Soviet computer industry could never meet this demand. The small industry leaned heavily on the IBM/360 platform, pirating the design for their Ryad model computers. But the industry could not produce the quantities desired. Since the Soviets could not build the numbers directed, they looked toward detente to buy Western computers. It was a fateful decision.26 Historian Simon Doing offers that the Soviets chose as they did because the West's computers were better than anything the Soviets were making. By buying computers, the Soviet states unwittingly adopted American technology and its standards. The dominance of English language-based computer operating software allowed American programmers to set the de facto standard for the world.27 The Soviets throttled back on developing their computer production in- dustry because the West seemed willing to fill the gap. Then, the Soviets discontinued most of their independent computer technology and industry de- velopment.28 The Soviet's "take" approach was adequate if the West continued to sell them computers. The Soviets realized that the West might be unwilling to sell them computers at some point. Thus, they began an aggressive effort to steal the technology. The theft approach was not new. As early as 1924, a steady stream of Soviet spies operating illegally un- der fake business or diplomatic credentials stole intellectual property from the West. By the 1980s, the Soviets had become experts at stealing industrial tech- nology. The thefts occurred even during the Second World War when the So- viets, British, and Americans were allies.29 Eugene S. Poteat, a senior Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) executive during most of the Cold War, wrote that the Soviet intelligence services stole "virtually all the West's military and defense technology secrets" in the post-Second World War era. The thefts saved the Soviets time and the expense of research and development; it allowed them to keep pace with the technology competition in the early days of the Cold War.30 The West had a growing concern about selling computers to the Soviets. By LeeseVol. 14, No. 2 1973, the West sought to strengthen the diplomatic and economic sanctions used since 1948 to slow technology transfer to the Soviet Bloc. The control mea- sures forced the Soviets to always "play catch-up" to the West in technology. The embargo's trade controls were overseen by a consultative group of North Atlan- tic Treaty Organization (NATO) members and Japan called the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Control (CoCom). There were more than 500 items embargoed from export to the Soviet Bloc and China. Embargoes are a double-edged sword; they also impeded the West's economic expansion. Historian Frank Cain wrote that the embargo policy created a growing divide "between the UK and USA concerning whether the trade should prevail over ideology. "32 Keeping the allies and industry on the same side regarding the embargo was challenging. Britain disagreed with many export strictures and used "exception provisions" to justify to CoCom the sales of computers. Further, the Soviet Bloc's "general progress toward self-sufficiency" made some export controls seem obsolete. The list of export-controlled items and individu- al nations' requests for exemption to the list was in constant tension.33 Under detente, the strict export controls on the sale of computers lessened, replaced by a series of loose post-sale control mechanisms. National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger codified the "free trade with conditions" position and post-sale controls of the Richard M. Nixon administration in the March 1974 national security decision memorandum (NSDM) 247. The memorandum in- creased the maximum computer processing rate requiring special export licens- es, simultaneously expanding and strengthening the "post-sale safeguards. "34 The safeguards were costly and extraordinary since they were executed on Soviet soil after export, a unique penetration of the closed Soviet state. The controls included on-site inspections by Westerners permanently based in the Soviet Union. Inspectors were authorized to scale down systems on-site if the com- puting power exceeded the agreed-upon requirement.35 To Nixon, the controls were enough to maintain security and detente. Not everyone agreed. Members of Congress perceived that selling technology to the Soviets erod- ed the United States' technological advantage, no matter the strictures used. A 1970 intelligence community memorandum regarding the CoCom countries' sales to the Soviet Bloc assessed a lessening of export control efficacy. The re- port, viewed through an alarmist lens, provoked further concern and analysis of detente-related trade relaxations.36 A 1973 Rand report prepared for the De- partment of Defense and the Council on International Economic Policy offered that the computer gap between the United States and the Soviets had been reduced. The Soviets closed the gap by buying computers, conducting illegal technology transfers, and through industrial espionage.37 None of the post-sale controls outlined by Kissinger was satisfactory to technology "protectionists" inside the military or Congress. The United States feared the Soviets were catching up even when data countered the shrinking computer gap argument.38 "Gap" theory, or the belief that an adversary has superiority in technology, weapons, and national power The Cold War Computer Arms RaceJournal of Advanced Military Studies compared to the United States, dominated U.S. strategic culture during the Cold War. Intelligence and defense communities hotly debated atomic weap- ons, bombers, and missile numbers.39 While not as prominent as the weapons debates, the computer gap underpinned many technologies needed to develop and employ the weapons. Trade issues with the Soviet Bloc came to the forefront in 1973. Nixon desired further reforms that opened trade, setting up a traditional domestic battle between "free trade" and "protectionist" groups.40 Some protectionists in Congress claimed CoCom safeguards protected the use of the systems, not the transfer of technology.41 The debate continued throughout 1974 and 1975. The transfer of tangible technology, the systems, leading to a loss of intangible knowledge, the know-how, to the Soviets was the foundation of the J. Fred Bucy-led panel's recommendation (the Bucy Report) in 1976. The report successfully advocated a conceptual shift from regulating physical goods to controlling know-how. The Bucy Report's primary concern was not reverse en- gineering; it rejected that concern as an ineffective way of technology transfer. The real fear was that the Soviets might acquire so much experience operating and maintaining cutting-edge technology that they learned how to design and manufacture the computers themselves.42 Computers Enhanced Warfare and Reagan's Strategic Competition Ronald Reagan saw "peace through strength" as the only approach to deal- ing with the Soviets; he swept into power. His predecessor, President James E. "Jimmy" Carter, had a stagnant national security strategy that looked to main- tain the status quo of detente. His strategy failed. In 1976, new Soviet SS-20 intermediate-range missiles were deployed, forcing NATO to take a "dual- track" response. NATO negotiated the removal of the SS-20s while planning to deploy Pershing II and a ground-launched cruise missile (GLCM) version of the Navy's Tomahawk.43 The year 1979 became a year of crisis as the Sovi- ets invaded Afghanistan, the Shah of Iran was overthrown, American hostages were seized in Tehran, and the socialist Sandinistas came to power in Nicara- gua. Carter increased defense spending by around $8 billion ($32.6 million in 2022 dollars), focusing money on the technology-based offset strategy begun in 1972. Nevertheless, it was too late.44 In 1981, Reagan reinvigorated the 30-year-old containment strategy and integrated it with more aggressive competition. By 1983, Reagan's strategy was formed and in operation. Security Decision Directive 75 expressed his intention to "contain and over time reverse Soviet expansionism by competing effectively on a sustained basis with the Soviet Union in all international arenas. "45 The United States would compete across a variety of security areas. Competition would include nuclear and conventional weapons development and employ- ment using openly discussed war fighting strategies, economic sanctions, pro- motion of human rights, and efforts to undermine Soviet advancements in the LeeseVol. 14, No. 2 Third World by using open and covert support for anti-Soviet resistance move- ments in Eastern Europe, Afghanistan, Angola, Ethiopia, and Nicaragua.46 Reagan started by emphasizing the expansion of U.S. military forces. He asked for an increase of $43.4 billion in defense spending.47 Expanding the force and making it more capable created symmetry and restored the military balance with the Soviets, an essential mechanism for deterrence. It also allowed for U.S. military "action across the entire spectrum of potential conflicts. "48 By preparing for conflict, the military provided a foundation of deterrence and coercion that countered Soviet competition, allowing the full range of U.S. and Western policies to be used against the Soviet Bloc.49 However, increasing the military only mattered if the United States was willing to use the force. Removing the self-imposed post-Vietnam restrictions regarding the use of military force was Reagan's next goal. The willingness to use military power to achieve limited objectives that resulted in greater political ones was vital.50 Reagan employed military force at least five times during his two terms in office. Each time he used force, Bruce W. Jentleson argues, it was part of a broad coercive diplomacy effort. The use of force strategy "was more than deterrence but less than a quick, decisive military" outcome, Jentleson wrote, a methodical approach to force foreign policy restraint on the Soviets. For example, the CIA covertly supported Afghanistan mujahideen against the Soviet invasion. Con- versely, the U.S. Marines deployed to Lebanon with the Multinational Force (MNF) in 1982-84. The Navy pressured Libya and eventually conducted a bombing in 1986. The Navy again was used in the 1987-88 reflagging of Ku- waiti oil tankers in the Arabian Gulf and the attack on Iranian naval forces.51 Short, sharp conflicts, like the invasions of Grenada (1983) and Panama (1989), and the display of new military technologies increased the perception of the lethality of U.S. military power. It supported the deterrence and coercive diplomacy effort.52 The U.S. military's technological advantage gave Reagan an asymmetric offset in the military power competition. Detente had shrunk the computer gap, lessening the U.S. military's offset strategy. For Reagan, detente was dead. He restored and increased controls over technology transfers and sales to the Soviet Bloc. More critical technologies and equipment were added to the Co- Com embargo list, and national licensing procedures were changed to increase the effectiveness of enforcement efforts. Additionally, the United States began to unilaterally place export restraints on technology and equipment beyond the CoCom structure. In particular, the United States unilaterally embargoed computer technology associated with gas and oil production to impede Russia's petroleum-based economy.53 There were vulnerabilities inside the growing, almost ubiquitous applica- tion of computer technologies. It was not enough to use embargoes to restrict transfers yet leave the computer networks themselves vulnerable. Since 1972, the National Security Agency (NSA) warned that the current computer internet The Cold War Computer Arms RaceJournal of Advanced Military Studies technology and policies were inadequate. For example, there was no separation of classified and unclassified networks, NSA and the Air Force noted, and users without clearances worked at the same consoles as those accessing classified data. The dual-use consoles were more convenient and saved time, but they created a significant risk of "accidental disclosure."54 In the early-1980s, revelations about U.S. information security and com- mand and control systems weakness came to light. Soviet economic and mili- tary espionage was more extensive than previously understood. In 1981, KGB (Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnosti) science and technology collector and informant for the French intelligence service, Vladimir Vetrov (code name Fare- well), provided a list of KGB targets and the extent to which industrial espio- nage had penetrated U.S. and Western technology industries.55 Geoffrey Arthur Prime, a British Government Communications Headquarters employee, was arrested in 1982. Retired U.S. Navy chief warrant officer John A. Walker was arrested in 1985. The arrests revealed that for at least two decades, defense secrets were stolen from the information systems; it drove home information network security concerns.56 If the espionage unearthing was not enough, an incident in 1979 showed that data stored on a network could be manipulated, causing confusion that could lead to war. Someone at North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) inadvertently entered nuclear weapons attack simulation data. A missile attack warning was sent from the computer, and a short, sharp panic ensued before the alert was canceled. But little would be done to secure U.S. military networks until the 1983 movie WarGames was released. The movie's premise was that a high school student deliberately hacked a Department of De- fense computer, almost starting a global thermonuclear war. The movie inspired actions in the real world. A few high school students in Wisconsin hacked into unclassified Department of Defense computers that same year. Reagan acted quickly, creating policies and strictures that secured vital Department of De- fense computers. Legislation, in the form of the Computer Security Act, would not catch up to policy until 1987.57 Reagan continued to leverage the U.S. military to create force legitimacy by openly discussing conventional weapons development and employment strate- gies to defeat Warsaw Pact forces. The approach added a new narrative dimen- sion to the competition. The United States was so confident in its technology overmatch, so went the narrative, that it was willing to reveal some of its capa- bilities. The capabilities, and unifying thinking regarding how to use them, are expressed through military doctrine.58 For example, the AirLand Battle doctrine promulgated in 1982, and later, the new maritime strategy revealed in 1986 influenced how the United States and NATO thought of and planned-for war against Warsaw Pact land forces in Europe.59 New U.S. military doctrine embraced emerging technologies that increased after the 1973 Yom Kippur War. Combined with the lessons from the Vietnam War, the Yom Kippur War reinforced the necessity of air power in conduct- LeeseVol. 14, No. 2 ing modern land warfare. The Soviets had drawn the same lesson. They began modernizing their military in the late 1960s. Throughout the 1970s, the So- viets developed a concept of strategic operations using conventional force in Europe. The Warsaw Pact ground forces would attack in depth using initial and reinforcing echelons. The initial attacking units, operational maneuver groups, penetrated NATO defenses while the follow-on echelon exploited the break- through.60 AirLand Battle was at the end of a doctrinal evolution addressing a series of technological improvements in both maneuver and reconnaissance-to-strike complexes. The improvements focused on attacking Soviet armor units in the initial and follow-on echelons to delay, disrupt, and destroy them before the So- viet Army could mass irresistible combat power. The U.S. Army would handle defeating the initial attacking units and the Air Force the follow-on echelons. AirLand Battle looked to exploit the perceived Warsaw Pact weakness of tactical rigidity, predictable echelonment, and technological inferiority.61 AirLand Battle doctrine drove an explosion in computer technology in- tegrated battlefield systems development and procurement. The Air Force's battlefield air interdiction mission against follow-on forces led to the devel- opment of several standoff attack systems: the General Dynamics-Grumman EF-111 Raven standoff-jamming and reconnaissance platform, the laser-guided antitank Maverick air-to-surface missile, the McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle's beyond-visual-range radar missiles, and the specifically designed close-air- support tank killer, Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II.62 Despite the Air Force's deep battle systems development, the Army also developed the high- ly maneuverable Boeing AH-64A Apache helicopter. The Apache could attack the initial echelon and follow-on forces using its advanced weapons targeting system with a 20-mm chain gun and laser-guided Hellfire missiles to attack troops and armor. They also developed the MGM-140 Army Tactical Missile System (ATACMS). With a 306-kilometer range, the surface-to-surface mis- sile ATACMS fired antipersonnel and antiarmor submunitions from a mobile multiple-launch rocket system.63 Probably the most significant weapon system developed was the Assault Breaker demonstration program. Assault Breaker integrated several technologies developed during and after the Vietnam War, including lasers, electro-optical sensors, microelectronics, data processors, and radars. Its surveillance and tar- geting system supported surface (the ATACMS) and air-launched, long-range conventional weapons delivering a mass of smart submunition (bomblets) that could break up massing follow-on echelons. The program led to developing an airborne moving target indication radar called the "Pave Mover." The system could detect, track, and target slow-moving armored vehicles allowing long- range surface and air missiles to launch attacks.64 The Soviets took notice of Assault Breaker when DARPA publicly demon- strated many of the required technological capabilities in 1976. In 1979, the Soviets simulated the Assault Breaker concept in a wargame. The game revealed The Cold War Computer Arms RaceJournal of Advanced Military Studies their European strategy was useless if Assault Breaker worked as advertised. By 1982, the United States had publicly demonstrated the Assault Breaker system; by 1983, some of the system's components were in production. In 1984, Mar- shal Ogarkov declared that the United States had achieved a "military-technical revolution" with its systems.65 Both the Soviets and Americans recognized that the switch from analog to digital technologies and the increasing use of space-based systems for reconnais- sance and communication allowed for the necessary real-time command and control of cross-domain operations. The Soviets further recognized that their estimate of a 10-12-year rearmament cycle had now greatly compressed. The current Soviet economy and the lessening of access to advanced Western tech- nology in the post-detente environment resulted in a lack of capacity to match the U.S. military rearmament.66 The Soviet military was concerned. The requirement for computers, machine- tool manufacturing, and microelectronics was essential to compete in the military-technical revolution. Yet, Soviet industry no longer sufficed, and the political support to fix the problem seemed limited. Marshal Ogarkov, wanting to keep pace with a growing Western military technology advantage, constant- ly argued for more money and improved military industry practices.67 There was no money to be had. The Cold War landscape evolved, and a generational change occurred within the Soviet leadership. Ogarkov, mainly because he con- tinued demanding that more money be poured into revamping Soviet conven- tional forces for a war no one wanted, was demoted in September 1984.68 Computer Arms Race Comes to a Head What led to the rise in U.S.-Soviet tensions were the events of 1983. On 8 March, Reagan called the Soviets the "focus of evil in the modern world" and advocated for deploying the Pershing II and GLCM missiles (delivered in No- vember 1983) to Europe.69 Fifteen days later, he announced his support for developing a Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) against ballistic missiles. Soviet- U.S. tension continued to increase. In September, Soviet air defense forces mistook Korean Airlines 007 for a U.S. military reconnaissance aircraft. They downed the aircraft, killing all on board. A month later, terrorists killed 241 U.S. Marines in Lebanon, and the U.S. invaded Grenada to prevent the pre- sumed "Soviet-Cuban militarization of the Caribbean."70 In November, U.S. and NATO exercise Able Archer 83 confused the Soviet air and missile com- mands. The confusion, false warnings of U.S. missile launches from the Soviet's orbital early-warning system, and the heightened tension almost resulted in war.71 SDI, Reagan touted, rendered ballistic missiles "impotent and obsolete. "72 Such a system undermined the current strategic deterrence system by reduc- ing the concepts of mutually assured destruction, seemingly violating the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty. Dubbed the "Star Wars" program, the SDI announcement's timing and television delivery was dramatic. A spectacular Ce- LeeseVol. 14, No. 2 cil B. DeMille-esk event by the former movie actor leveraged the technology narrative to the utmost. Reagan believed in the SDI, or at least the concept's power to force the Soviets to reevaluate the current competitive landscape. However, many in his administration and America's European allies did not believe in the system, its feasibility, nor its goal. Reagan, nonetheless, oversold SDI's capabilities with significant effect on the Soviets.73 The technology for a weaponized laser system, the foundation of SDI, was still in its infancy. Developing such a system and a space-based platform to place it on was technically feasible. But the cost to develop the system was so great that it could cripple the U.S. economy before it was operational. Despite Reagan announcing the program, the U.S. military technology sector quietly argued to abandon the effort.74 Soviet science and technology communities, according to informant Farewell, felt the same about developing a space-based laser system. The Soviets had abandoned the development of a similar system years earlier.75 Here, the Soviet's take versus make approach to the computer arms race came home to roost. The CIA saw an opportunity to exploit the Soviet's indus- trial espionage reliance Farewell had revealed. The CIA allowed certain docu- ments to be "taken" by KGB operatives. The documents and other measures deceived the KGB into believing the United States' laser program had solved the vast technical problems and was building a weaponized laser.76 The confident Soviet empire of the 1970s, which had gained 10 countries since the Communist victory in Vietnam, was fading.77 The Soviets could ill afford to spend more on a theoretical ABM system. They already spent 10-15 percent of gross national product (GNP) on the military and another 3 percent on operating the Soviet empire.78 The spending was a drag on an already shaky economic system. Worse, the spending was gaining them little. The war in Af- ghanistan was not going well, and the CIA was secretly helping the mujahideen to ensure it remained that way. Andrew Busch provides a summary of Reagan's doctrine at this time. The use of SDI, economic sanctions, improved U.S. and NATO military doctrine and weapons, coercive diplomacy, and an ideological offensive created for the Soviets what Eduard Shevardnadze, the last Soviet minister of foreign affairs (1985 to 1990), described as a "Gordian knot. . . . No matter where we turned, we came up against the fact that we would achieve nothing without normaliza- tion of Soviet/American relations. "79 Reagan's doctrine honed the West's computer exceptionalism narrative and thrust it deeply into the Soviet psyche. Reagan wanted to "lean on the Soviets until they go broke." Information operations and the leveraging Assault Break- er, among other successes, supported the coercive diplomacy narrative of the West's technological superiority. The information approach used a narrative of military lethality to mold perception, what Edward Luttwak called "armed sua- sion. "80 Other U.S. offset technologies, however, were not openly revealed. The United States' decision regarding what and when military technologies were re- The Cold War Computer Arms RaceJournal of Advanced Military Studies vealed, if at all, was part of the information campaign. It exploited Soviet weak- nesses of over relying on economic espionage by creating a subtle undertow in the technology superiority narrative. "What technologies do we not know about?" sowed doubt and uncertainty in Soviet military planning.81 Conclusions The Cold War evokes powerful memories and important lessons for the na- tional security community. The case of the computer arms race provides an opportunity to consider the integration of the military with the economic and diplomatic levers in strategic competition. Like during the Cold War, today's world continues to shift inside the information environment. Creating Wimex, new reconnaissance-to-strike complexes, and smart weapons was critical to the Cold War technological revolution in military affairs. Today, the growth of the cyber domain and artificial intelligence (AI) creates another technology revo- lution. But the world today is different than in the 1980s. The 1970s and 1980s science and technology explosion were fueled by the capitalist market-oriented economy that created power far greater than the Soviet's government-controlled system. China has learned from the Soviet's Cold War mistakes. They have cen- tral party control of the economy but embrace a form of capitalism that makes it more resilient. China continues to look for comparative advantage through taking instead of making technology. They produce many products but less unique intellectual capital. The West's willingness to cooperate, often to create a better bottom line on the ledger sheet, provides China access to legal and illegal mechanisms allowing them to take the technology. The West makes China's theft easier. Using embargoes to protect the science and technology sector, as seen in the Cold War, has limited effects. Bolstering the embargoes by improv- ing security within the defense industry and academic community is essential. Using a strong narrative that ties efforts across the national levers of power is essential. Reagan's effort in the 1980s is an example of integrated strategic competition campaigning, a concept being discussed in current U.S. military doctrine. The military's role in Reagan's campaign was to create and maintain the narrative of peace through strength. He increased the U.S. military in size, creating, at least in certain areas, symmetry and a quantitative balance of power with the Soviets. More importantly, Reagan leveraged asymmetry in computer technology as an offset strategy. He honed the narrative of U.S. technological exceptionalism and the lethality of computer-infused warfare. Then, he plunged it deep into the Soviet psyche, creating deterrence, coercion, and strategic pa- ralysis. The role of today's U.S. military is as it was in the late Cold War. Certainly, symmetry is required, and some increase in the U.S. force and the addition of allies must balance China's increases. Asymmetry, the offset strategy, is where the United States must focus. New U.S. and allies' competition concepts and doctrine must lay the foundation for the technology offset effort. Demonstrat- LeeseVol. 14, No. 2 ing ever-increasing lethality and battlefield competency should be a goal. In- creasing military power is deterrence, forcing China to consider foreign policy restraint, as Reagan did with the Soviets in the Caribbean. Showing a willing- ness to use the military, or at least the weapons systems, as in the case of support to Ukraine, helps legitimize technology-driven lethality. But these actions must be coupled with diplomatic efforts that deter China and Russia while encourag- ing them to reverse harmful foreign and domestic policies. Computer technology and the social changes it brought were too signifi- cant to deny the Soviet Union access completely. Competing and cooperating became, for the Soviets and Americans, a delicate yet often exhausting dance. In the U.S. and China dance, the latter seems to be leading, initiating the transi- tions and steps. As China already has, the United States and the West must ac- cept that competition with some cooperation is a more effective way to remain free of conflict. Remaining free of conflict buys time. And time is needed for the West's integrated strategic competition campaign of deterrence, coercive di- plomacy, and generational leadership and societal changes to take effect against China, as they did against the Soviet Union. Endnotes Leslie H. Gelb, "Who Won the Cold War?," New York Times, 20 August 1992, sec. A. 2. Three concept documents describe this new perspective of strategic competition for the Joint Force in Strategic Competition, Joint Doctrine (JD) Note 1-22 (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2023); Competition Continuum, JD Note 1-19 (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 3 June 2019); and Joint Concept for Integrated Campaigning (Washington, DC: Joint Chiefs of Staff, 2018). Ronald O'Rourke, Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense--Issues for Con- gress (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2022), 6, 26-30. Yudhijit Bhattacharjee, "The Daring Ruse that Exposed China's Campaign to Steal American Secrets," New York Times, 7 March 2023. Brendan Thomas-Noone, "What the Cold War Can Teach Washington about Chinese Tech Tensions," Brookings (blog), 12 January 2021. 6. David L. Boslaugh, When Computers Went to Sea: The Story of the Naval Tactical Data System, NTDS--Engineering and Technology History (Los Alamitos, CA: Wiley-IEEE Computer Society, 2003), chaps. 1-3 provide a detailed discussion of the almost two-decade development of NTDS. See also Norman Friedman, Network-Centric War- fare: How Navies Learned to Fight Smarter through Three World Wars (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2009), chap. 7. 7. The first five chapters provide a detailed discussion of the NTDS and SAGE associated computer systems programs during 20 years. Boslaugh, When Computers Went to Sea. Benjamin Peters, "From Cybernetics to Cyber Networks: Norbert Wiener, the Soviet Internet, and the Cold War Dawn of Information Universalism" (PhD diss., Columbia University, 2010), 171; A History of the ARPANET: The First Decade (Arlington, VA: Bolt Beranek & Newman, 1981), II-2. For more on Baran's view, see his published papers at "Paul Baran and the Origins of the Internet," Rand, accessed 5 May 2022. Paul Baran, On Distributed Communications: I. Introduction to Distributed Communi- cations Networks (Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 1964), secs. "Standard Message Blocks" and "Switching." A History of the ARPANET, II-5. The Cold War Computer Arms RaceJournal of Advanced Military Studies Baran's ideas were not accepted at first. When British researcher Donald Watts Davies of the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) independently came to the same theory proposing a concept similar to Baran's in 1965, distributed communications became accepted. For a list of Baran's 1964 publications, see "Paul Baran and the Origins of the Internet"; and Peters, "From Cybernetics to Cyber Networks," 182. Harris points out the other elements that make the internet possible were developed by others including Leonard Kleinrock at UCLA. In a February 2000 email to Davies, Baran offered: "You and I share a common view of what packet switching is all about, since you and I in- dependently came up with the same ingredients." Gordon E. Moore, "Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits," Elec- tronics 38, no. 8 (April 1965): 4. For a thorough discussion on how the Soviet system works against the development and use of computers in the society, see David A. Wellman, A Chip in the Curtain: Computer Technology in the Soviet Union (Washington, DC: National Defense Univer- sity Press, 1989), chap. 3. Slava Gerovitch, "How the Computer Got Its Revenge on the Soviet Union," Nautilus, 9 April 2015. 16. Norman Friedman, The Fifty-Year War: Conflict and Strategy in the Cold War (Annapo- lis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2000), 189-92. "We will bury you!" (Russian: <<My vas pokhoronim!>>) is a phrase used by Khrushchev while addressing Western ambassadors at a reception at the Polish embassy in Moscow on 18 November 1956. Friedman, The Fifty-Year War, 211-15. 18. The U.S. intelligence community was closely tracking the Soviet efforts to computerize economic planning and execution. Intelligence Memorandum: The 1959 Soviet Budget (Langley, VA: Central Intelligence Agency [CIA], 1959); and Prospects for Computers in the Soviet Economy (Langley, VA: CIA, 1967). Peters, "From Cybernetics to Cyber Networks," 198. Peters, "From Cybernetics to Cyber Networks," 254. Peters, "From Cybernetics to Cyber Networks," 247-54. Slava Gerovitch, "InterNyet: Why the Soviet Union Did Not Build a Nationwide Computer Network," History and Technology 24, no. 4 (December 2008): 338, https:// doi.org/10.1080/07341510802044736. National Intelligence Estimate: Soviet Strategic Defenses (Langley, VA: CIA, 1972), 1-5. Kitov created the first cybernetic department in the Soviet military in 1952, imple- mented the first use of computers (the Strela), and theorized the air and missile defense network in his PhD dissertation. He was the military's cybernetics champion. Kitov's report meant for Khrushchev was called the "red book" for the color of its cover. Kitov reemerged in 1962 at the new Institute of Cybernetics in Kyiv. Peters, "From Cyber- netics to Cyber Networks," 248-49. Peters, "From Cybernetics to Cyber Networks," 255-57. 26. Wellman, A Chip in the Curtain, 96. 27. Wellman, A Chip in the Curtain, 103. Aram Ter-Ghazaryan, "Computers in the USSR: A Story of Missed Opportunities," Russia Beyond, 24 September 2014; James Titus, "Soviet Computing: A Giant Awak- ens?," Datamation, 15 December 1971, 38-41; and Wellman, A Chip in the Curtain, 71-75. 29. Many of the defectors discussed were tasked with economic espionage. Kevin P. Riehle, "Insider Information: The Strategic Windfall Gained from Soviet Intelligence Officer Defectors" (diss., King's College London, 2018). The case of Iosif Volodarsky and Gaik Ovakimyan conducting science and technology intelligence in the United States in 1935 is illustrative. Kevin P. Riehle, Russian Intelligence: A Case-Based Study of Rus- sian Services and Missions Past and Present (Bethesda, MD: National Intelligence Press, 2022), 137. Eugene S. Poteat, "The Attack on America's Intellectual Property Espionage after the Cold War," Bent of Tau Beta PI (Winter 2001): 14. "Cold War Sanctions--Embargoes and Sanctions," American Foreign Relations, ac- LeeseVol. 14, No. 2 cessed 5 July 2022; and Adam Kline and Tim Hwang, From Cold War Sanctions to Weaponized Interdependence (Washington, DC: Center for Security and Emerging Technology, 2021), 3. Frank Cain, "Computers and the Cold War: United States Restrictions on the Export of Computers to the Soviet Union and Communist China," Journal of Contemporary History 40, no. 1 (January 2005): 138, https://doi.org/10.1177/0022009405049270. Cain, "Computers and the Cold War," 133-37; COCOM Countries' Sales of Technology to the USSR and Eastern Europe (Langley, VA: CIA, 1970), 1-3. 34. Mario Daniels, "Safeguarding Detente: U.S. High Performance Computer Exports to the Soviet Union," Diplomatic History 46, no. 4 (September 2022): 8, https://doi. org/10.1093/dh/dhac031. For details, see "U.S. Policy on the Export of Computers to Communist Countries," National Security Department Memo 247. 35. Daniels, "Safeguarding Detente," 4-9. Before 1967, no requests for CoCom exemption had been submitted. After the relax- ation of controls by the 1967-69 CoCom List Review, 32 requests for exemption were submitted in the first 7 months of 1970. See "COCOM Countries' Sales of Technolo- gy to the USSR and Eastern Europe." Rein Turn, U.S. vs IBM: The Computer Gap and National Security: Implications for Relaxing Export Controls, Working Note (Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 1973). "The Soviet computer industry is a troubled and lagging sector of the Soviet econo- my." "Production of Computers in the USSR," Intelligence Memorandum, CIA, July 1971, 1. 39. The "gap" theory can also be part of a general civilian-military perception and com- munication problem. Thomas S. Szayna et al., The Civil-Military Gap in the United States: Does It Exist, Why, and Does It Matter? (Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 2007). For more discussion on bomber and missile gaps, see John Prados, The Soviet Estimate: U.S. Intelligence Analysis & Russian Military Strength (New York: Dial Press, 1982), chaps. 4 and 8. For a discussion regarding the concept of the offensive/defensive balance of military technology, see Jack S. Levy, "The Offensive/Defensive Balance of Military Technology: A Theoretical and Historical Analysis," International Studies Quarterly 28, no. 2 (1984): 219-38, https://doi.org/10.2307/2600696. "Nixon Seeks Sweeping New Power," New York Times, 15 April 1973, sec. Archives. For more on the assessed benefits to the Soviets from detente, see Soviet Economic and Technological Benefits from Detente (Washington, DC: CIA, 1974); An Act to Promote the Development of an Open, Nondiscriminatory, and Fair World Economic System, to Stimulate Fair and Free Competition Between the United States and Foreign Na- tions, to Foster and Economic Growth of, and Full Employment in, The United States, and for Other Purposes. H.R. 10710, 93d Cong. (1973). An Analysis of Export Controls of U.S. Technology--A DoD Perspective (Washington, DC: Office of the Director of Defense Research and Engineering, 1976), 25. "A Short History of NATO," NATO, accessed 27 March 2023; and "The Euromissile Showdown," Air & Space Forces Magazine (blog), accessed 30 March 2023. John Lewis Gaddis, Strategies of Containment: A Critical Appraisal of American National Security Policy During the Cold War (Cary, NC: Oxford University Press, 2005), 342-49; and Jeremy Kuzmarov, "The Improbable Militarist: Jimmy Car- ter, the Revolution in Military Affairs and Limits of the American Two-Party Sys- tem," Class, Race and Corporate Power 6, no. 2 (2018): https://doi.org/10.25148/ CRCP.6.2.008311. NSDD 75 on "U.S. Relations with the USSR" (Washington, DC: White House, 1983). Gaddis, Strategies of Containment, 356-57. Leslie H. Gelb, "Reagan's Military Budget Puts Emphasis on a Buildup of U.S. Global Power," New York Times, 7 February 1982. NSDD 75 on "U.S. Relations with the USSR," 7. Andrew E. Busch, "Ronald Reagan and the Defeat of the Soviet Empire," Presidential Studies Quarterly 27, no. 3 (1997): 454. See also Gaddis, Strategies of Containment, The Cold War Computer Arms RaceJournal of Advanced Military Studies 52. chap. 11. Regarding the policy and the role of the U.S. military, see NSDD 75 on "U.S. Relations with the USSR," 7. Gaddis, Strategies of Containment, 348. Bruce W. Jentleson, "The Reagan Administration and Coercive Diplomacy: Restrain- ing More than Remaking Governments," Political Science Quarterly 106, no. 1 (1991): 58-59, https://doi.org/10.2307/2152174. Reagan's idea to use limited force while dis- playing the ability to deliver far more conventional force destruction came partly from a 1975 study by Barry Blechman and Stephen Kaplan. Blechman and Kaplan showed that direct military action attains desired outcomes for only a short period. Barry M. Blechman and Stephen S. Kaplan, Force without War: U.S. Armed Forces as a Political Instrument (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1978). Jentleson, "The Reagan Administration and Coercive Diplomacy," 58-59; and Blech- man and Kaplan, Force without War. NSDD 75 on "U.S. Relations with the USSR," 3-4. A nine-volume study. Barry W. Boehm and Allen C. Haile, Information Processing/Data Automation Implications of Air Force Command and Control Requirements in the 1980s, vol. 11, Roadmaps (Los Angeles, CA: Space and Missile Systems Organization, 1972). Ware discusses the other Rand studies. Willis H. Ware, Security Controls for Computer Systems: Report of Defense Science Board Task Force on Computer Security (Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 1979), https://doi.org/10.7249/R609-1. Sergei Kostin et al., Farewell: The Greatest Spy Story of the Twentieth Century (Las Vegas, NV: AmazonCrossing, 2011). See also Christopher M. Andrew and Oleg Gordievsky, KGB: The Inside Story of Its Foreign Operations from Lenin to Gorbachev, 1st ed. (New York: HarperCollins, 1990), 623. Prime provided the Soviets with an estimated $1 billion of signals intelligence during 22 years. Walker provided the KGB with U.S. Navy communication equipment tech- nical details and encryption key codes for 17 years. Andrew and Gordievsky, KGB, 524-31. Congress investigated and eventually passed the Computer Security Act in 1987. Mi- chael Warner, "Cybersecurity: A Pre-History," Intelligence and National Security 27, no. 5 (2012): 786-88, https://doi.org/10.1080/02684527.2012.708530. For a deeper discussion on doctrine and its role, see Milan N. Vego, Joint Operational Warfare: Theory and Practice (Newport, RI: U.S. Naval War College, 2009), chap. 12. 59. NATO retained Flexible Response as its primary doctrine. AirLand Battle and the subconcept of Follow-on Forces Attack (FOFA) forced NATO to discuss the implica- tions of emerging military technologies. Douglas W. Skinner, AirLand Battle Doctrine (Arlington, VA: CNA, 1988), 1. A discussion regarding the need to consider resource planning for the concepts of AirLand Battle and its subconcepts is discussed. Proceed- ings of the Third International Seminar: The Current Debate on NATO Strategy (Rome, IT: Research Division, NATO Defense College, 1985), 64-67; Long Term Planning Guideline for Follow-on Forces Attack was approved by NATO in 1984. Michael J. Div- er, NATO's Follow-On Forces Attack (FOFA) Concept: Past, Present and Future (Fort Belvoir, VA: Defense Technical Information Center, 1990), https://doi.org/10.21236 /ADA224090. 60. Diego A. Ruiz-Palmer, Theatre Operations, High Commands and Large-Scale Exercises in Soviet and Russian Military Practice Insights and Implications (Rome: Research Division, NATO Defense College, 2018). Skinner, AirLand Battle Doctrine, 6. Skinner, AirLand Battle Doctrine, 25. R. Kent Laughbaum, Synchronizing Airpower and Firepower in the Deep Battle (Max- well AFB, AL: Air University Press, 1999). Skinner, AirLand Battle Doctrine, 25; Pave Mover was redesignated as Joint Surveil- lance and Target Acquisition System (JSTARS) in the 1980s. "JSTARS," DARPA, ac- cessed 31 March 2023. 65. Octavian Manea, "The Role of Offset Strategies in Restoring Conventional Deter- LeeseVol. 14, No. 2 rence," interview with Robert O. Work, the 31st Deputy Secretary of Defense, Small Wars Journal, 4 January 2018. 66. Notra Trulock III, Kerry L. Hines, and Anne D. Herr, Soviet Military Thought in Tran- sition: Implications for the Long-Term Military Competition, PSR Report No. 1831 (Ar- lington, VA: Pacific-Sierra Research, 1988), 42-53. Trulock, Hines, and Herr, Soviet Military Thought in Transition, 54-58; and Gordon S. Barrass, "The Renaissance in American Strategy and the Ending of the Great Cold War," Military Review, February 2010. Barrass, "The Renaissance in American Strategy and the Ending of the Great Cold War." Ronald Reagan, "Ronald Reagan, 'Evil Empire Speech'," Voices of Democracy (blog), 8 March 1983. 70. Not everyone agreed with the United States. The United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution on 2 November 1983 "deeply deploring" the invasion of Grenada as "a flagrant violation of international law." Grenada's nearest neighbors and Israel voted with the United States against the resolution, which passed by a vote of 108 to 9. John T. Correll, "The Grenada Adventure," Air & Space Forces Magazine, 1 November 2012, 64. 71. Declassified documents revealed that U.S. intelligence recognized that the Soviets had increased their alert posture and war footing. Cooler heads in the lower levels of op- erational C2 prevented an escalation. See declassified documents: "Able Archer War Scare 'Potentially Disastrous'," National Security Archive, accessed 31 March 2023; and "Able Archer 83 Nearly Sparked Nuclear War with the Soviets," Smithsonian Mag- azine, 27 April 2022. "Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI)," Atomic Heritage Foundation, 18 July 2018. "Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI)." Regarding SDI's part in undermining Soviet strat- egy. Busch, "Ronald Reagan and the Defeat of the Soviet Empire," 455-60. "Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI)." Kostin et al., Farewell, 284-86. Kostin et al., Farewell, 284-86. Busch, "Ronald Reagan and the Defeat of the Soviet Empire," 451. 78. The CIA estimated 15-17 percent and a 1980 Rand study on the Soviet Empire of- fered as much as 21.4 percent in 1980. Holzman argues the numbers are inflated and should be 8-10 percent of Soviet GNP. Franklyn D. Holzman, "Politics and Guess- work: CIA and DIA Estimates of Soviet Military Spending," International Security 14, no. 2 (1989): 101-31, https://doi.org/10.2307/2538856. The empire is described as those Soviet Bloc states and periphery states they wished to influence. Charles Wolf Jr. et al., The Cost of the Soviet Empire (Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 1983), https://doi .org/10.7249/R3073.1. Busch, "Ronald Reagan and the Defeat of the Soviet Empire," 461-62. Edward Luttwak, The Political Uses of Sea Power (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Uni- versity Press, 1974); and James R. Holmes, "You Have to Be There," U.S. Naval Insti- tute Proceedings 148, no. 7 (July 2022). Robert Tomes, "Why the Cold War Offset Strategy Was All about Deterrence and Stealth," War on the Rocks, 14 January 2015. The Cold War Computer Arms RaceJournal of Advanced Military Studie
Starostenko O.V. ORCID: 0009-0007-5755-9525 DEIaKI PITANNIa KRIMINAL'NO- PRAVOVOGO ZABEZPEChENNIa ... NALEZhNOGO FUNKTsIONUVANNIa SFERI KREDITUVANNIa V UKRAYiNI UDK [343.53:336.77] (477) Postanovka problemi. Bankivs'ka sistema, v tsilomu, i sfe- ra kredituvannia zokrema, perebuvaiut' u postiinomu fokusi su- spil'stva, oskil'ki same stabil'na robota ta khoroshi pokazniki tsiieyi galuzi ie indikatorami vektoriv rukhu derzhavi v yiyi rozvitku. I navpaki, negativni pokazniki roboti bankivs'koyi sistemi vkazu- iut', iak pravilo, na ekonomichnu stagnatsiiu. Ne mensh tsikavoiu ie bankivs'ka sistema zagalom, i sfera kre- dituvannia zokrema, dlia predstavnikiv zlochinnogo svitu. Krimi- nal'no-protipravni diiannia u sferi kredituvannia vchinialisia ta vchiniaiut' nezalezhno vid ekonomichnogo stanu derzhavi ta pri bud'- iakikh umovakh roboti bankivs'koyi sistemi. Iakisna protidiia takim kriminal'nim pravoporushenniam ie nadzvichaino vazhlivoiu, adzhe taki zlochinni diiannia maiut' naslidkom pidriv doviri suspil'stva do bankiv z usima naslidkami, shcho z ts'ogo viplivaiut'. Vazhlive mistse u zabezpechenni nalezhnogo funktsionuvannia sferi kredituvannia v Ukrayini ie isnuvannia doskonalogo krimi- nal'no-pravovogo pidg'runtia dlia zabezpechennia efektivnogo re- aguvannia na protipravni diiannia u vidpovidnii sferi. Vodnochas, zmusheni konstatuvati, shcho kriminal'ne zakonodavstvo ta prakti- ka iogo zastosuvannia, v chastini kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpe- chennia nalezhnogo funktsionuvannia sferi kredituvannia v Ukrayini, ne mozhna viznati doskonalim. Z ogliadu na navedene, aktual'nist' obranoyi temi obumovliu- iet'sia neobkhidnistiu podal'shogo poshuku ta viroblennia shliakhiv vdoskonalennia mekhanizmiv kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia, nalezhnogo funktsionuvannia sferi kredituvannia v Ukrayini. ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Starostenko O.V. Stan doslidzhennia. Ochevidno, shcho pitannia kriminal'no-pra- vovogo zabezpechennia nalezhnogo funktsionuvannia sferi kreditu- vannia v Ukrayini stali predmetom uvagi bagat'okh doslidnikiv. Z ogliadu na pidvishchenu suspil'nu nebezpechnist' kriminal'- nikh pravoporushen' u bankivs'kii sferi, uvaga doslidnikiv pri- dilena rozgliadu iak zagal'no-teoretichnikh pitan' funktsionuvannia bankivs'koyi sistemi ta sferi kredituvannia, tak i pitan' krimi- nal'no-pravovikh ta kriminalistichnikh aspektiv otsinki ta protidiyi vidpovidnomu vidu zlochinnosti, a takozh doslidzhenniu kriminal'- no-protsesual'nikh aspektiv ta pitan' operativno-rozshukovoyi di- ial'nosti u rozkritti ta rozsliduvanni vidpovidnikh kriminal'nikh pravoporushen'. Pitannia osoblivostei vchinennia kriminal'- nikh pravoporushen' v sferi kredituvannia v svoyikh doslidzhenniakh pidnimali A.M.Baboshin, V.Z.Bagins'kii, O.P.Bil'ko, O.P.Bu- shchan, V.I.Vasilinchuk, Ie. M.Vasilin, O.V.Gerasimov, S.V.Gordi- ienko, M.L.Davidenko, O.O.Dudorov, R.A.Zaporozhets', A.M.Kloch- ko, Iu.V.Kliuchik, O.R.Kolb, Iu.I.Kondra, O.O.Konstantinova, V.V.Korniienko, L.I.Kriushenko, O.V.Krishevich, S.O.Lukianenko, P.S.Matishevs'kii, G.A.Matusovs'kii, C.S.Mel'nik, V.R.Moi- sik, R.O.Movchan, V.O.Navrots'kii, V.D.Polivaniuk, V.M.Po- povich, O.O.Puchkov, M.P. Strel'bits'kii, L.M.Strel'bits'ka, O.O.Sukhachov, O.V.Tikhonova, C.C.Trach, V.V.Khiliuta, D.M. Tsedik, S.S.Cherniavs'kii, N.V.Shargorods'ka toshcho. Popri vidpovidnu naukovu aktivnist', pitannia iakosti kri- minal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia nalezhnogo funktsionuvannia sferi kredituvannia v Ukrayini dosi nalezhit' do nevirishenikh. Za- konodavets' ne vidreaguvav na nizku naukovikh propozitsii u tsii sferi. Pravozastosovna praktika dosi dopuskaie vipadki priiniat- tia riznikh rishen' pri otsintsi podibnikh situatsii. Doslidzheno ne vsi mozhlivosti zabezpechennia nalezhnogo funktsionuvannia sferi kredituvannia v Ukrayini kriminal'no-pravovimi zasobami toshcho. Metoiu tsiieyi statti ie obg'runtuvannia ta formuliuvannia (z ura- khuvanniam zdobutkiv kriminal'no-pravovoyi nauki ta pravozasto- sovnoyi praktiki) teoretichnikh polozhen' ta praktichnikh rekomen- datsii, spriamovanikh na vdoskonalennia kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia nalezhnogo funktsionuvannia sferi kredituvannia v ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Deiaki pitannia kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia... Ukrayini. Z ogliadu na obshirnist' okreslenoyi meti, u ts'omu dosli- dzhenni uvaga bude zaktsentovana na tr'okh, iak vidaiet'sia, osnovnikh pitanniakh, iaki stosuiut'sia napriamkiv podal'shogo udoskonalennia protidiyi kriminal'nim pravoporushenniam u sferi kredituvannia, a same, 1) pitanniam dotsil'nosti vidilennia v Kriminal'nomu ko- deksi (dali - KK) Ukrayini okremogo rozdilu pro vidpovidal'nist' za kriminal'ni pravoporushennia u bankivs'kii sferi (sferi kredi- tuvannia); 2) pitannia kriminal'no-pravovoyi otsinki protipravnikh dii pratsivnikiv pervinnoyi lanki kreditnogo protsesu, 3) pitannia dotsil'nosti/nedotsil'nosti peredbachennia mozhlivosti zastosuvan- nia zakhodiv kriminal'no-pravovogo kharakteru shchodo iuridichnikh osib u sferi kredituvannia. Viklad osnovnogo materialu. V literaturi zaznachaiet'sia, shcho osnovnimi prichinami, shcho spriiaiut' zrostanniu rivnia zlochiniv u sferi bankivs'koyi diial'nosti, vchiniuvanikh sluzhbovimi osobami, a takozh vishchimi sluzhbovimi osobami, nalezhnimi do kategoriyi der- zhavnikh chi gromads'kikh diiachiv, ie: 1) nenalezhna perevirka upovno- vazhenimi osobami bankiv potentsiinikh pratsivnikiv bankivs'kikh ustanov pid chas pratsevlashtuvannia; 2) pogliblennia diial'nosti organizovanikh zlochinnikh ugrupovan' u zmovi zi sluzhbovimi oso- bami ta kerivnikami bankivs'kikh ustanov; 3) progalini chinno- go zakonodavstva shchodo reglamentatsiyi povnovazhen' sluzhbovikh ta posadovikh osib shchodo nenalezhnogo vikonannia yikh funktsional'nikh obov'iazkiv v okremo viznachenii sferi; 4) osobisti motivi nedo- brosovisnikh spivrobitnikiv bankivs'kikh ustanov ta pov'iazanikh iz bankom osib, zumovleni mozhlivistiu otrimati znachni groshovi koshti pri shchodennomu dostupi do nikh; 5) visoka latentnist' tsikh zlochiniv; 6) nenalezhnii riven' profesiinoyi pidgotovki spivro- bitnikiv pravookhoronnikh organiv iz viiavlennia ta rozkrittia takikh pravoporushen'; 7) vidsutnist' u kriminal'nomu zakonodavstvi Ukrayini zabezpechuval'nikh kriminal'no-pravovikh norm, iaki vsta- novliuvali bi visokii riven' kriminal'noyi vidpovidal'nosti dlia kerivnikiv, a takozh vishchikh sluzhbovikh osib (derzhavnikh ta gromad- s'kikh diiachiv) za yikh nepravomirni diyi, vchineni u velikikh ta osoblivo velikikh rozmirakh, iaki sprichinili suspil'no nebezpechni naslidki dlia ekonomiki krayini; 8) vidsutnist' u kriminal'nomu zakonodav- ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Starostenko O.V. stvi Ukrayini vidpovidal'nosti kerivnikiv, a takozh vishchikh sluzh- bovikh osib (derzhavnikh ta gromads'kikh diiachiv) za yikh bezdiial'nist' ta nevzhittia vidpovidnikh preventivnikh zakhodiv, spriamovanikh na zapobigannia vchinenniu zlochiniv u sferi bankivs'koyi diial'nosti [1, s. 200]. Ochevidno, shcho v mezhakh tsiieyi statti mi ne mozhemo zaproponu- vati bachennia shliakhiv virishennia (neitralizatsiyi) usikh perelichenikh negativnikh faktoriv. Vidtak, uvaga bude zoseredzhena na virishen- ni tr'okh pitan', iaki okresleno u meti ts'ogo doslidzhennia. Nasampered, z'iasuiemo chi potribni strukturni zmini KK Ukra- yini, shchob domogtisia efektivnogo kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpe- chennia nalezhnogo funktsionuvannia sferi kredituvannia v Ukrayini. Chomus' uzhe tak povelosia, shcho doslidniki pitan' vidpovi- dal'nosti za pevni vidi kriminal'nikh pravoporushen', shuka- iuchi noviznu svoyikh doslidzhen', proponuiut' abo <<novi>> rozdili v Osoblivii chastini KK Ukrayini, statti iakogo reglamentuvali b pitannia vidpovidal'nosti same za taki <<doslidzhuvani>> diiannia, abo posilennia sanktsii. Pri ts'omu, ne pridiliaiet'sia nalezhna uvaga pitanniam: chi uzgodzhuiet'sia take vidilennia <<novikh>> rozdiliv ta posilennia sanktsii z kontseptual'nimi zasadami pobudovi KK Ukrayini v tsilomu; chi ne stvoriuvatime zaivikh problem u pravoza- stosovnii diial'nosti u zv'iazku z poiavoiu novikh (iak pravilo spetsi- al'nikh) norm toshcho. Na zhal' zakonodavets' takozh namagaiet'sia virishiti sotsial'ni ta ekonomichni problemi nasampered kriminal'no-pravovimi za- sobami. Avtori zakonoproektiv, a takozh deputati, iaki pidtrimu- iut' vidpovidnii zakonoproekt chasto peresliduiut' populists'ki tsili. Vstanovlenniam kriminal'noyi vidpovidal'nosti za pevni di- iannia abo zminoiu isnuiuchikh sanktsii na taki, iaki ie ob'iektivno nadto zhorstkimi chi nadto m'iakim deputati, iak pravilo, khochut' pro- demonstruvati svoiu zatsikavlenist' u virishenni vidpovidnoyi sus- pil'noyi problemi. Inkoli taki diyi ie vidvertim piarom. Skladaiet'sia vrazhennia, shcho, na zhal', okremi zakonodavtsi dosi ne usvidomili, shcho lishe shliakhom vstanovlennia kriminal'noyi vidpovidal'nosti za pevne diiannia, posilenniam sanktsii, bez vzhittia kompleksu inshikh zakhodiv (sotsial'nikh, ekonomichnikh toshcho), virishiti bil'shist' so- tsial'nikh problem nemozhlivo. ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Deiaki pitannia kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia... Spokusi zaproponuvati vidilennia v KK Ukrayini okremogo rozdilu Osoblivoyi chastini, statti iakogo reglamentuvali b pitan- nia vidpovidal'nosti za kriminal'ni pravoporushennia u sferi kre- dituvannia zakonodavtsi ta naukovtsi ominuli, takikh propozitsii mi ne zustrili. Prote, maie mistse naukova pozitsiia dotsil'nosti vidi- lennia iak samostiinogo institutu kriminal'no-pravovoyi okhoroni sferi bankivs'koyi diial'nosti Ukrayini u vigliadi rozdilu Osobli- voyi chastini KK Ukrayini, shcho <<dast' zmogu bil'sh tochno vidobrazi- ti osoblivosti vidovogo ob'iekta suspil'no nebezpechnikh diian' tsiieyi grupi, spriiatime z'iasuvanniu yikh spetsifiki i stupenia suspil'noyi nebezpeki, pravil'nii kvalifikatsiyi ta individualizatsiyi pokarannia. Takozh formuvannia institutu kriminal'no-pravovoyi okhoroni ban- kivs'koyi diial'nosti Ukrayini dast' mozhlivist' na bil'sh visokomu rivni vstanovliuvati prichini i umovi takikh kriminal'nikh pra- voporushen', uzhivati bil'sh efektivni zakhodi shchodo zapobigannia yim>> [2, s. 138]. Vodnochas O.O. Dudorov ta R.O. Movchan vidznachili, shcho ne pidtrimuiut' vikladenu propozitsiiu ta argumentatsiiu na yiyi korist'. Peredusim zaznachili, shcho zaproponovana A.M.Klochko zmistovna napovniuvanist' grupi kriminal'nimi pravoporushen- niami u sferi bankivs'koyi diial'nosti ne ie bezspirnoiu. Ne vpevneni naukovtsi i u tomu, shcho vidilennia v okremii rozdil KK norm pro kriminal'ni pravoporushennia u sferi bankivs'koyi diial'nosti (iak, do slova, i bud'-iakikh inshikh kriminal'nikh pravoporushen') dopo- mozhe zminiti na krashche situatsiiu iz zastosuvanniam vidpovidnikh zaboron. Do togo zh spriiniattia propozitsiyi A.M. Klochko, iaka fak- tichno zvodit'sia do neobkhidnosti vidilennia okremoyi grupi krimi- nal'nikh pravoporushen' za yikhnim vidovim ob'iektom, svidchitime pro neobkhidnist' zmini strukturi vsiieyi sistemi Osoblivoyi chasti- ni KK, iaka nini pobudovana za kriteriiem rodovogo, a ne vidovogo ob'iekta [3, s. 465]. Taku zh pozitsiiu zaimaie Ie.M.Vasilin [4, s.93]. Iak vidaiet'sia, vidilennia kriminal'nikh pravoporushen' u sferi bankivs'koyi diial'nosti u <<samostiinii institut kriminal'- no-pravovoyi okhoroni sferi bankivs'koyi diial'nosti Ukrayini>> mozhe predstavliati khiba pevnii naukovii interes. Takozh zaznachaiemo, shcho u proiekti KK Ukrayini [5] ne peredba- cheno vidilennia okremogo rozdilu kriminal'nikh pravoporushen' u sferi bankivs'koyi diial'nosti ta/abo kredituvannia. ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Starostenko O.V. Shchodo pitannia kriminal'no-pravovoyi otsinki protipravnoyi diial'nosti pratsivnikiv pervinnoyi lanki kreditnogo protsesu, to provedenii analiz sudovoyi praktiki shchodo zastosuvannia vidpovi- dal'nosti za kriminal'ni pravoporushennia u sferi kredituvannia viiaviv, shcho popri dovoli detal'nu uvagu do pitannia rozmezhuvannia sluzhbovikh ta ne sluzhbovikh osib v ukrayins'kii kriminal'no-pra- vovii nautsi, dosi isnuie problema skladnosti (neodnostainosti sudovoyi praktiki) u pitanniakh viznannia/neviznannia pratsivnikiv kreditnikh organizatsii sluzhbovimi osobami. Zi vstanovlenniam sub'iekta kriminal'nogo pravoporushennia pravozastosovna praktika stikaiet'sia povsiakchas. U kozhnomu kri- minal'nomu provadzhenni potribno virishiti, chi ie pidstavi vizna- ti osobu, iaka vchinila pevne diiannia, sub'iektom kriminal'nogo pra- voporushennia, chi nadilena vona vidpovidnimi oznakami. U deiakikh kategoriiakh sprav tse viklikaie pevni trudnoshchi ta navit' prizvodit' do pravozastosovnikh pomilok. Neridko nepravil'ne viznachennia sub'iekta kriminal'nogo pravoporushennia vede do pritiagnennia do kriminal'noyi vidpovidal'nosti osib, iaki vzagali takii vidpovidal'- nosti ne pidliagaiut', inkriminuvannia <<ne tikh>> statei Osoblivoyi chastini KK, abo zh, tiagne nepravomirne nezastosuvannia krimi- nal'nogo zakonu i uniknennia kriminal'noyi vidpovidal'nosti [6, s. 204]. A.M. Klochko zaznachaie, shcho do spetsial'nikh sub'iektiv zlochiniv u sferi bankivs'koyi diial'nosti neobkhidno zarakhuvati kerivnika, inshu sluzhbovu osobu banku, pov'iazanikh iz bankom osib u znachen- ni, viznachenomu Zakonom Ukrayini <<Pro banki ta bankivs'ku di- ial'nist'>>. Takozh doslidnitsia zauvazhuie, shcho chinne zakonodavstvo Ukrayini ne mistit' konkretnikh roz'iasnen' shchodo togo, iaki same ka- tegoriyi spivrobitnikiv bankivs'kikh ustanov pidpadaiut' pid for- muliuvannia <<sluzhbova osoba banku>> [3, s. 138]. Za rezul'tatami analizu sudovoyi praktiki do chisla sluzhbo- vikh osib, iaki vchiniali kriminal'ni pravoporushennia u sferi kre- dituvannia, iak pravilo, vidnosiat' osib, iaki zaimaiut' taki tipovi posadi: nachal'nika viddilu (iakii za svoieiu posadoiu vkhodit' do kreditnoyi komisiyi), kerivnika viddilennia, chleniv kreditnikh ko- mitetiv (komisiyi), golovu kreditnoyi ustanovi toshcho. Z kriminal'- ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Deiaki pitannia kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia... no-pravovoiu otsinkoiu dii takikh osib istotnikh skladnoshchiv ne vi- nikaie. Prote, iak slushno vidznachaie A.M.Klochko pid chas rozgliadu kriminal'nikh provadzhen', pov'iazanikh iz uchinenniam zlochiniv u sferi bankivs'koyi diial'nosti, vinikaiut' trudnoshchi ta pomilki v kvalifikatsiyi, zokrema pid chas viznachennia ob'iektivnoyi i sub'iektiv- noyi storoni diiannia, iogo sub'iekta, shcho neridko prizvodit' do vi- pravdannia pidsudnikh. Tsia problema svidchit' pro nedoskonalist' kriminal'nogo zakonodavstva, a takozh praktiki iogo zastosuvan- nia [3, s. 138]. Provedene doslidzhennia pidtverdilo, shcho ukrayins'ki sudi po-riznomu kvalifikuiut', nasampered, protipravni diiannia pratsiv- nikiv pervinnoyi lanki kreditnogo protsesu. Zmist nizki sudovikh rishen' [7-17] zasvidchuie, shcho protipravni diyi osib, iaki nalezhali do pratsivnikiv pervinnoyi lanki kreditnogo protsesu ta faktichno vikonuvali odnakovi za svoyim zmistom obov'iazki, otrimali riznu kriminal'nu pravovu otsinku z boku pravookhoronnikh ta sudovikh organiv: abo iak kriminal'ne pravoporushennia vidpovidal'nist', za vchinennia iakogo peredbachena st. 358 KK Ukrayini <<Pidroblennia dokumentiv, pechatok, shtampiv ta blankiv, zbut chi vikoristannia pidroblenikh dokumentiv, pechatok, shtampiv>> (sub'iekt skladu - za- gal'nii), abo za st. 366 <<Sluzhbove pidroblennia>> (sub'iekt spetsi- al'nii). Taka neodnoridna situatsiia sklalasia u zv'iazku iz nenalezhnoiu otsinkoiu posadovikh instruktsii ta nenalezhnim z'iasuvanniam kharak- teru obov'iazkiv vinnikh osib, iaki ie suttievimi ta istotno vplivaiut' na viznachennia statti KK Ukrayini, iaka maie zastosovuvatisia do vchi- nenogo kriminal'nogo pravoporushennia. Pri kriminal'no-pravovii otsintsi dii takikh osib slid vrakho- vuvati, shcho tak zvani <<kreditni eksperti>> v kozhnomu banku ime- nuiut'sia po-svoiemu, napriklad: menedzher, ekspert viddilu pro- dazhiv, kreditnii spetsialist, fakhivets' z kredituvannia, golovnii ekonomist, starshii kreditnii inspektor toshcho. Do povnovazhen' nazvanikh osib nalezhit' vikonannia obov'iazkiv shchodo nadannia kon- sul'tatsii potentsiinim pozichal'nikam, formuvannia ta vedennia kreditnoyi spravi i t.d. Pri ts'omu, same tsi osobi ie pershimi, khto ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Starostenko O.V. provodit' pervinnu robotu z potentsiinim kliientom (pozichal'- nikom), same z nikh rozpochinaiet'sia pershii etap kreditnogo pro- tsesu. Same voni skladaiut' kreditnii proekt ta robliat' pershii visnovok pro mozhlivist' nadannia kreditu, v tomu chisli voni nadileni povnovazhenniami pidpisuvati rozporiadzhennia v bukhgal- teriiu (kasu) pro perevedennia kreditnikh koshtiv na rakhunok po- zichal'nika. Tobto yikh rishennia ie kintsevim i takim, shcho ne potrebuie dodatkovogo zatverdzhennia. Krim togo, v mezhakh spozhivchogo kredituvannia <<kreditnii ekspert>>, iakii predstavliaie kreditnu ustanovu v merezhakh tor- givel'nikh tsentriv, nadilenii pravom virishuvati chi vnositi do <<programnogo kompleksu>> paket dokumentiv pro potentsiinogo pozichal'nika abo zh vidmoviti v priiniatti dokumentiv. Rozgliad zaiavki ta nadannia vidpovidi programnim kompleksom vidbuvaiet'sia v avtomatichnomu rezhimi, tobto bez uchasti kreditnoyi komisiyi. Vidtak, <<kreditnii ekspert>> samostiino i ostatochno priimaie (mozhe priiniati) rishennia pro vidmovu v nadanni kreditu (navit' iakshcho potentsiinii pozichal'nik maie pidstavi iogo otrimati), i, po suti, odnoosobovo priimaie rishennia pro iogo nadannia, vnosia- chi do <<programnogo kompleksu>> potribnu informatsiiu. Taka oso- ba nalezhno obiznana iaki vidomosti i iak slid vnesti (a iaki ne slid vnositi), shchob <<programnii kompleks>> pogodiv nadannia kreditu. Z ogliadu na vishchevikladene, vidaiet'sia, shcho bil'sh pravil'noiu ie pozitsiia otsinki protipravnikh dii pratsivnikiv pervinnoyi lanki kreditnogo protsesu (tak zvanikh <<kreditnikh ekspertiv>>), iak dii vchinenikh sluzhbovimi osobami, oskil'ki yikh povnovazhennia ie za svoyim zmistom organizatsiino-rozporiadchimi. Iak slushno zaznachaie V.O. Navrots'kii, osoba ie sluzhbovoiu ne til'ki todi, koli vona vikonuie vidpovidni funktsiyi chi obov'iaz- ki postiino, ale i todi, koli vona yikh vikonuie timchasovo abo za spetsial'nim povnovazhenniam za umovi, shcho tsi obov'iazki chi pov- novazhennia pokladeni na neyi u vstanovlenomu zakonom poriadku pravomochnim organom abo sluzhbovoiu osoboiu. Odnak u zv'iazku iz vidnesenniam do sluzhbovikh osib pevnikh kategorii pratsivnikiv, iaki epizodichno zdiisniuiut' organizatsiino-rozporiadchi abo administra- tivno-gospodars'ki obov'iazki abo zh yikh funktsiyi lishe na pershii ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Deiaki pitannia kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia... pogliad pov'iazani z takimi povnovazhenniami, v teoriyi kriminal'- nogo prava isnuiut' diskusiyi, a na praktitsi vinikaiut' skladnoshchi [18, s. 339]. Beruchi do uvagi neodnakovu sudovu praktiku v pitanni kri- minal'no-pravovoyi otsinki diian' pratsivnikiv pervinnoyi lanki kre- ditnogo protsesu, skhiliaiemosia do dumki, shcho ostatochnii pravovii visnovok shchodo vidnesennia/nevidnesennia <<kreditnikh ekspertiv>> do kategoriyi sluzhbovikh osib mav bi zrobiti Verkhovnii Sud, do povnovazhen' iakogo vkhodit' zabezpechennia iednosti sudovoyi prakti- ki. Odnak, takikh visnovkiv kasatsiina instantsiia poki ne zrobila. Shchodo pitannia shchodo dotsil'nosti peredbachennia normativnikh pidstav zastosuvannia zakhodiv kriminal'no-pravovogo kharakteru do kreditnikh ustanov, iak iuridichnikh osib, to mirkuvannia z ts'o- go privodu taki. Analiz diial'nosti iuridichnikh osib zasvidchuie, shcho skladna organizatsiina struktura pidpriiemstv, znachna kil'kist' osib, zaluchenikh u sferu tsiieyi diial'nosti, a takozh pevna detsentrali- zatsiia upravlinnia spriiaie zbil'shenniu faktiv vchinennia protiprav- nikh dii z yikh boku [19, s. 274]. Sered ukrayins'kikh naukovtsiv rizniat'sia dumki shchodo mozhlivo- sti ta dotsil'nosti zaprovadzhennia kriminal'noyi vidpovidal'nosti iuridichnikh osib. Odni vvazhaiut', shcho isnuiuchi pravovi mekhanizmi ie dostatnimi dlia borot'bi z nezakonnoiu povedinkoiu iuridichnikh osib. Razom z tim problemnoiu mozhe buti i situatsiia z osobami, iaki volodiiut' korporativnimi pravami shchodo iuridichnikh osib, zokrema, bankiv (zasnovniki, uchasniki, aktsioneri). Adzhe voni mozhut' zhodnim chinom ne znati pro vchinennia upovnovazhenimi osobami (vikonavchim organom, predstavnikom toshcho) kriminal'- no karanikh diian', ne brati uchasti v nikh, ne otrimuvati vigodu vid tsikh diian', ale yikh prava mozhut' buti porusheni v razi pritiagnennia iuridichnoyi osobi do kriminal'noyi vidpovidal'nosti [5, s.161]. Inshi vvazhaiut', shcho vinikaie potreba u zaprovadzhenni pria- mikh karal'nikh sanktsii bezposeredn'o do iuridichnoyi osobi, shcho stane zakonomirnoiu sproboiu posiliti kontrol' za negativni- mi naslidkami gospodars'koyi diial'nosti peredusim velikikh kor- poratsii, oskil'ki z kozhnim rokom v ekonomitsi sposterigaiut'sia tendentsiyi do ukrupnennia biznesu ta monopolizatsiyi, do ignoruvannia interesiv okremogo spozhivacha ta suspil'stva zagalom [19, s. 274]. ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Starostenko O.V. Iak mi znaiemo, ukrayins'kii zakonodavets' obrav promizhnii pidkhid: ne zaprovadzhuiuchi, u chistomu vigliadi, kriminal'nu vid- povidal'nist' iuridichnikh osib, Zakonom No. 314-VII vid 23.05.2013 dopovniv KK Ukrayini rozdilom XIV-1 <<Zakhodi kriminal'no-pra- vovogo kharakteru shchodo iuridichnikh osib>>. Statteiu 96-3 KK pe- redbacheno pidstavi dlia zastosuvannia do iuridichnoyi osobi zakhodiv kriminal'no-pravovogo kharakteru ta viznacheno perelik statei KK, za iakimi do iuridichnikh osib zastosovuiut' zakhodi kriminal'- no-pravovogo kharakteru za naiavnosti vidpovidnikh pidstav. Shchodo doslidzhuvanogo nami vidu kriminal'no-protipravnikh dii, to slid vidznachiti, shcho A.M. Klochko svogo chasu proponuvala zakripiti vidpovidal'nist' iuridichnikh osib za porushennia poriad- ku zainiattia gospodars'koiu diial'nistiu ta diial'nistiu z nadannia finansovikh poslug u formi zastosuvannia vidpovidnikh zakhodiv kriminal'no-pravovogo kharakteru v KK Ukrayini [3, s. 139]. Taka propozitsiia, iak vidaiet'sia, ie ne lishe slushnoiu, a navit' pidliagaie rozshirenniu z takikh mirkuvan'. Odniieiu z pidstav dlia zastosuvannia do iuridichnoyi osobi zakho- div kriminal'no-pravovogo kharakteru zakonodavets' zakripiv (p. 2 ch.1 st. 96-3 KK Ukrayini) <<nezabezpechennia vikonannia pokladenikh na yiyi upovnovazhenu osobu zakonom abo ustanovchimi dokumentami iuridichnoyi osobi obov'iazkiv shchodo vzhittia zakhodiv iz zapobigannia koruptsiyi, shcho prizvelo do vchinennia bud'-iakogo iz kriminal'nikh pravoporushen', peredbachenikh u stattiakh 209 i 306, chastinakh per- shii i drugii statti 368-3, chastinakh pershii i drugii statti 368-4, stattiakh 369 i 369-2 ts'ogo Kodeksu>>. Tse nashtovkhuie na dumku chi ne varto, z ogliadu na chutlivist' i vazhlivist' bankivs'koyi sferi zagalom ta sferi kredituvannia zokrema, zvazhaiuchi na velichez- ni vtrati vid nedobrosovisnoyi diial'nosti bankivs'kikh pratsivni- kiv pid chas kreditnogo protsesu toshcho, peredbachiti mozhlivist' zastosuvannia do kreditnikh ustanov, iak iuridichnikh osib, zakhodiv kriminal'no-pravovogo kharakteru za <<nezabezpechennia organom upravlinnia bankivs'kikh ta kreditnikh ustanov nalezhnogo kontr- oliu, shcho prizvelo do vchinennia sluzhbovimi osobami vidpovidnoyi iuridichnoyi osobi kriminal'nikh pravoporushen' peredbachenikh stattiami 191, 209, 362, 364, 364-1, 366, 367, 368, ch.3 st. 368-3, 388 KK ts'ogo Kodeksu>>. ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Deiaki pitannia kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia... Z ogliadu na mizhnarodnii dosvid, balans interesiv kredito- ra ta borzhnika i mirkuvannia vitchiznianikh naukovtsiv vidaiet'sia, shcho peredbachennia mozhlivosti zastosuvannia do iuridichnikh osib (kreditnikh ustanov) zakhodiv kriminal'no-pravovogo kharakteru zagalom spriiatime pidvishchenniu vnutrishn'obankivs'kogo kontr- oliu ta vnutrishn'ogo kontroliu v inshikh kreditnikh ustanovakh, shcho matime naslidkom formuvannia pozitivnogo imidzhu i doviri do bankivs'koyi sistemi ta sistemi kredituvannia v Ukrayini, a vidtak prizvede do zmenshenniu faktiv vchinennia vidpovidnikh protiprav- nikh diian' u vkazanikh sferakh. Visnovki. Pidsumovuiuchi, mozhemo konstatuvati, shcho vdosko- nalennia kriminal'nogo zakonodavstva shchodo protidiyi kriminal'- nim pravoporushenniam u sferi kredituvannia shliakhom vidilennia okremogo rozdilu v KK Ukrayini vidaiet'sia nedotsil'nim. Dumaiet'- sia, shcho chinnii KK Ukrayini mistit' dostatn'o zasobiv dlia nalezh- nogo reaguvannia na vchinennia protipravnikh diian' u vidpovidnikh sferakh. U pitanni kriminal'no-pravovoyi otsinki protipravnikh diian' pratsivnikiv pervinnoyi lanki kreditnogo protsesu pravozastosov- nim organam ta sudam neobkhidno pridiliati bil'she uvagi z'iasu- vanniu kharakteru obov'iazkiv vinnikh osib. V protsesi kriminal'- no-pravovoyi otsinki protipravnikh diian' takikh osib, iakshcho voni nadileni pravom priimati rishennia pro vidmovu v nadanni kredi- tu abo pro skeruvannia dokumentiv dlia podal'shogo rozgliadu (pro- gramnim kompleksom chi navit' kreditnim komitetom), yikh diiannia, iak vidaiet'sia, slid otsiniuvati iak diiannia sluzhbovikh osib. Peredbachennia okremikh pidstav dlia zastosuvannia zakhodiv kri- minal'no-pravovogo kharakteru do kreditnikh ustanov, iak iuridich- nikh osib, za <<nezabezpechennia organom upravlinnia bankivs'kikh ta kreditnikh ustanov nalezhnogo kontroliu, shcho prizvelo do vchi- nennia sluzhbovimi osobami vidpovidnoyi iuridichnoyi osobi kri- minal'nikh pravoporushen' peredbachenikh stattiami 191, 209, 362, 364, 364-1, 366, 367, 368, ch.3 st. 368-3, 388 KK Ukrayini>> mozhna vvazhati dotsil'nim ta takim, shcho matime pozitivnii efekt dlia zmenshennia kil'kosti protipravnikh diian' u vidpovidnii sferi ta obsiagiv shkodi, iaki voni zapodiiuiut'. ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Starostenko O.V. Dumaiet'sia, shcho realizatsiia zaproponovanikh pidkhodiv spriiati- me vdoskonalenniu kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia nalezh- nogo funktsionuvannia sferi kredituvannia v Ukrayini, pidvishchenniu doviri suspil'stva do finansovikh ustanov, pokrashchenniu imidzhu bankivs'koyi sistemi, vdoskonalenniu normativnoyi bazi kredit- nikh pravovidnosin. 1.Klochko A.M., Volchenko N.V., Kurilo O.M. Do pitannia vchinennia sluzh- bovikh zlovzhivan' u sferi bankivs'koyi diial'nosti Ukrayini. Iuridich- nii naukovii elektronnii zhurnal. 4/2019. S. 198-201 2.Klochko A.M. Shliakhi vdoskonalennia kriminal'nogo zakonodavstva Ukrayini shchodo vidpovidal'nosti za zlochini u sferi bankivs'koyi di- ial'nosti. Iuridichnii naukovii elektronnii zhurnal. 2017. No. 3. S. 136-140.1. 3.Dudorov O.O., Movchan R.O. Pro perspektivi udoskonalennia nazvi roz- dilu VII Osoblivoyi chastini Kriminal'nogo kodeksu Ukrayini. Elek- tronne naukove vidannia <<Analitichno-porivnial'ne pravoznavstvo>>. 2023. No. 1. S.461-467. 4.Vasilin Ie.M. Dovedennia banku do neplatospromozhnosti: sotsial'na obumovlenist' kriminalizatsiyi, analiz skladu zlochinu: Disertatsiia na zdobuttia nauk. stupenia kand. iurid. nauk: spets. 12.00.08. Dnipro, 2018. S.244. 5.Kontrol'nii tekst proiektu KK Ukrayini (stanom na 22.05.2023 z vrakhuvanniam rekomendatsii lingvistichnoyi ekspertizi ta okremikh zauvazhen' natsional'nikh i zarubizhnikh ekspertiv). URL: https:// newcriminalcode.org.ua/upload/media/2023/05/22/kontrolnyj-tekst- proektu-kk-22-05-2023.pdf 6.Ukrayins'ke kriminal'ne pravo. Zagal'na chastina : pidruchnik / P. S. Berzin ta in. ; za zag. red. V. Navrots'kogo. K. : Iurinkom Inter, 2013. 711 s. 7.Virok Apeliatsiinogo sudu Zhitomirs'koyi oblasti vid 11 liutogo 2013 roku u spravi No. 0602/1-9/2011. Iedinii derzhavnii reiestr sudovikh rishen'. URL: http://www.reyestr.court.gov.ua/Review/29260382 (data zvernennia: 01.06.2023). 8.Virok Mukachivs'ogo mis'kraionnogo sudu Zakarpats'koyi oblasti vid 01 lipnia 2014 roku u spravi No. 303/1513/14-k. Iedinii derzhavnii re- iestr sudovikh rishen'. URL: http://reestr.court.gov.ua/Review/53127598 (data zvernennia: 01.06.2023). ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Deiaki pitannia kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia... 9.Virok Shishats'kogo raionnogo sudu Poltavs'koyi oblasti vid 18 listo- pada 2015 roku u spravi No. 551/621/15-k. Iedinii derzhavnii reiestr sudovikh rishen'. URL: https://reyestr.court.gov.ua/Review/53579300 (data zvernennia: 01.06.2023). 10.Virok Shevchenkivs'kogo raionnogo sudu m. Kiieva u spravi No. 1-772/11 vid 16 grudnia 2015 roku. Iedinii derzhavnii reiestr sudovikh rishen'. URL: http://reyestr.court.gov.ua/Review/54719286 (data zvernennia: 01.06.2023). 11.Virok Voznesens'kogo mis'kraionnogo sudu Mikolayivs'koyi oblasti vid 03 liutogo 2016 roku u spravi No. 473/377/15-k. Iedinii derzhavnii reie- str sudovikh rishen'. URL: https://reyestr.court.gov.ua/Review/55503814 (data zvernennia: 01.06.2023). 12.Ukhvala Apeliatsiinogo sudu Mikolayivs'koyi oblasti vid 07 lipnia 2016 roku u spravi No. 473/377/15-k. Iedinii derzhavnii reiestr sudovikh rishen' Ukrayini. URL: https://reyestr.court.gov.ua/Review/58797036 (data zvernennia: 01.06.2023). 13.Virok Luts'kogo mis'kraionnogo sudu Volins'koyi oblasti vid 09.07.2012 u spravi No. 1-826/11. Iedinii derzhavnii reiestr sudovikh rishen'. URL: http://reyestr.court.gov.ua/Review/25486052 (data zver- nennia: 01.06.2023). 14.Virok Rzhishchivs'kogo mis'kogo sudu Kiyivs'koyi oblasti vid 07 zhovtnia 2021 roku u spravi No. 374/70/21. Iedinii derzhavnii reiestr sudovikh rishen'. URL: http://reestr.court.gov.ua/Review/100193020 (data zver- nennia: 01.06.2023). 15.Virok Zhovtnevogo raionnogo sudu m. Zaporizhzhia vid 29 veresnia 2021 roku u spravi No. 331/2666/18. Iedinii derzhavnii reiestr sudovikh ri- shen'. URL: https://reyestr.court.gov.ua/Review/99955325 (data zver- nennia: 01.06.2023). 16.Virok Korsun'-Shevchenkivs'kogo raionnogo sudu Cherkas'koyi oblas- ti vid 30 travnia 2014 roku u spravi No. 699/351/14-k. Iedinii der- zhavnii reiestr sudovikh rishen'. URL: https://reyestr.court.gov.ua/ Review/38977134 (data zvernennia: 01.06.2023). 17.Zaochne rishennia Solom'ians'kogo raionnogo sudu m. Kiieva u spravi No. 760/8140/14 vid 02 grudnia 2014 roku. Iedinii derzhavnii reiestr su- dovikh rishen' Ukrayini. URL: http://reestr.court.gov.ua/Review/44105677 (data zvernennia: 01.06.2023). 18.Navrots'kii V.O. Naskrizni kriminal'no-pravovi poniattia: navch.po- sib. Kiyiv: Iurinkom Inter, 2023. 376s. ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Starostenko O.V. 19.Grishchuk V.K., Pasieka O.F. Kriminal'na vidpovidal'nist' iuridichnikh osib. Naukovii visnik L'vivs'kogo derzhavnogo universitetu vnu- trishnikh sprav. 2012. No. 4. 274s., S. 274-291. Starostenko O.V. Deiaki pitannia kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia nalezhnogo funktsionuvannia sferi kredituvannia v Ukrayini. U suchasnikh umovakh nalezhna organizatsiia efektivnogo funktsionuvannia ban- kivs'koyi sistemi Ukrayini nabuvaie vse bil'shogo znachennia ta vazhlivim elemen- tom ekonomichnikh reform ie neobkhidnist' pravovogo zabezpechennia vid protiprav- nikh posiagan' na finansovu sferu, v tomu chisli kreditnu. Suspil'na nebezpeka zlochiniv u sferi bankivs'kogo kredituvannia kharak- terizuiet'sia visokim rivnem latentnosti; sprichinenniam zbitkiv komertsiinim bankam, yikh vlasnikam, vkladnikam ta derzhavi; destruktivnim vplivom na funk- tsionuvannia ekonomichnoyi sistemi derzhavi; gal'muvanniam vikonannia grosho- vo-kreditnoyi politiki derzhavi; spotvorenniam mekhanizmu vil'noyi konkurentsiyi. Viiavlennia ta svoiechasne rozkrittia tsiieyi kategoriyi zlochiniv ie odniieiu z garan- tii zabezpechennia stabil'nosti bankivs'koyi sistemi. Stattia prisviachena okremim pitanniam kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechen- nia nalezhnogo funktsionuvannia sferi kredituvannia v Ukrayini. Vidtak, zapropo- novano deiaki pidkhodi, iaki spriiatimut' vdoskonalenniu kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia nalezhnogo funktsionuvannia sferi kredituvannia v Ukrayini, pid- vishchenniu doviri suspil'stva do finansovikh ustanov, pokrashchenniu imidzhu ban- kivs'koyi sistemi, vdoskonalenniu normativnoyi bazi kreditnikh pravovidnosin. Propozitsiyi maiut' praktichnu spriamovanist', oskil'ki vikladenii material, navedeni visnovki, polozhennia ta propozitsiyi mozhut' buti vikoristani u nauko- vo-doslidnits'kii roboti; pravotvorchii diial'nosti; pravozastosovnii diial'nosti. Kliuchovi slova: kriminal'ne pravo, kriminal'ne zakonodavstvo, krimi- nal'no-pravove zabezpechennia, kriminal'ne pravoporushennia, zlochin, krimi- nal'na vidpovidal'nist', iuridichna osoba, bankivs'ka diial'nist', kredituvannia, pokarannia. Starostenko O.V. Selected Issues of Criminal and Legal Provision of Proper Functioning of the Crediting Sphere in Ukraine. In modern conditions, the proper organization and effective functioning of the Ukrainian banking system are becoming increasingly relevant, and an important element of economic reforms is the need for legal support of unlawful encroachments on the financial sphere, including the credit one. The public threat of crimes in the sphere of bank lending is characterized by a high level of latency, causing losses to commercial banks, their owners, depositors, and the state; destructive impact on the functioning of the economic system of the state; inhibition of the implementation of the monetary policy of the state; distortion of the mechanism of free competition. Detection and timely disclosure of this category of crimes is one of the guarantees of ensuring the banking system's stability. ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATEI Deiaki pitannia kriminal'no-pravovogo zabezpechennia... The article is devoted to particular issues of criminal and legal provision of functioning of the lending sphere in Ukraine. Hence, there are a number of approaches proposed to improve the criminal and legal provision of proper functioning of the lending sphere in Ukraine, to increase public confidence in financial institutions, to enhance the image of the banking system, and to improve the regulatory framework of credit legal relations. The suggestions have a practical orientation, as the stated material, the given conclusions, provisions, and proposals can be used in research work, law-making activity, and law enforcement activity. Keywords: criminal law, criminal legislation, criminal law enforcement, criminal offense, crime, criminal liability, legal entity, banking activity, lending, penalty. ZBIRNIK NAUKOVIKh STATE
Visnik KhNADU, vip. 87, 2019 UDK 004.8:629.36 DOI: 10.30977/BUL.2219-5548.2019.87.0.49 INTELEKTUAL'NI KOMP'IuTERNI TEKhNOLOGIYi ROZROBLENNIa TRANSPORTNIKh ZASOBIV Nikonov O.Ia. Kharkivs'kii natsional'nii avtomobil'no-dorozhnii universitet Anotatsiia. Rozglianuto intelektual'ni komp'iuterni tekhnologiyi rozroblennia transportnikh za- sobiv z vikoristanniam tekhnologiyi virtual'noyi real'nosti, sinergetichnogo pidkhodu, evoliutsii- nikh metodiv modeliuvannia, metodiv glibokogo navchannia shtuchnikh bagatosharovikh neironnikh merezh. Pobudovano priklad funktsional'noyi skhemi upravlinnia avtomobilem na osnovi metodiv glibokogo navchannia shtuchnikh bagatosharovikh neironnikh merezh. Kliuchovi slova: komp'iuterni tekhnologiyi, transportni zasobi, kritichni tekhnologii, shtuchnii intelekt, sinergetichnii pidkhid, evoliutsiini metodi. Vstup S'ogodni naukovo-tekhnologichna sfera sta- la golovnoiu arenoiu konkurentsiyi derzhav u sviti, a volodinnia tak zvanimi <<kritichnimi tekhnologiiami>> (KT) ie odnim z vagomikh vazhe- liv geopolitiki. Taki tekhnologiyi maiut' kliu- chove znachennia dlia rozshirennia mozhlivostei oboronozdatnosti derzhavi i dosiagnennia tsi- lei natsional'noyi bezpeki, nasampered viis'- kovoyi, viis'kovo-ekonomichnoyi ta naukovo- tekhnologichnoyi bezpeki. Viokremlennia KT vidbuvaiet'sia dlia viznachennia prioritetiv na- ukovo-tekhnologichnogo rozvitku derzhav ta viis'kovo-tekhnichnoyi politiki, krim togo, KT ie viznachal'nimi dlia protsesu stvorennia pers- pektivnikh zrazkiv ozbroiennia i viis'kovoyi tekhniki. stikaiet'sia liudstvo, potrebuiut' odnochasno- go vikoristannia dosiagnen' kil'kokh distsip- lin. Use chastishe instrumentarii z odniieyi ga- luzi nauki uspishno vikoristovuiet'sia v inshikh galuziakh. Napriklad, zrostaie stupin' matematizatsiyi ta komp'iuterizatsiyi naukovikh i tekhnologichnikh sfer. Takozh posiliuiet'sia i vzaiemnii vpliv tekhnologii. Vidobrazhenniam podibnikh tendentsii i stala konvergentsiia tekh- nologii. problemoiu ostann'ogo chasu ie stvorennia efektivnogo shtuchnogo intelektu, iakii dozvolit' rozrob- liati iakisno novi tekhnichni sistemi pidvishchenoyi shvidkodiyi, nadiinosti ta dovgovichnosti na osnovi konvergentsiyi tekhnologii [1-5]. Naiaktual'nishoiu Analiz publikatsii V Ukrayini shche v travni 1994 r. bulo priin- iato Postanovu Kabinetu Ministriv No. 310 <<Pro rozvitok i zakhist kritichnikh tekhnolo- gii>>. Odnak suchasnii perelik kritichnikh tekh- nologii u sferi virobnitstva ozbroiennia ta viis'kovoyi tekhniki z'iavivsia 2017 r. (rozporia- dzhennia Kabinetu Ministriv Ukrayini vid 30.08.2017 r. No. 600 <<Deiaki pitannia rozvitku kritichnikh tekhnologii u sferi virobnitstva ozbroiennia ta viis'kovoyi tekhniki>>). Vin mis- tit' perelik kritichnikh tekhnologii u sferi virobnitstva ozbroiennia ta viis'kovoyi tekhni- ki, a same: tekhnologiyi stvorennia zasobiv ura- zhennia ta zakhistu vid nikh, informatsiini tekh- khimichni nologiyi, tekhnologiyi, tekhnologiyi materialoznavstva, te- khnologiyi elementnoyi bazi radioelektroniki, tekhnologiyi pozitsionuvannia ta navigatsiyi, tekh- nologiyi taktichnoyi meditsini [1-5]. tekhnologiyi, optichni Same tomu pidtrimka natsional'nikh KT zdiisniuiet'sia bagat'ma promislovo rozvinu- timi krayinami svitu, na derzhavnomu rivni zatverdzhuiut'sia i pidtrimuiut'sia pereliki takikh tekhnologii. Naiposhirenisha i naire- tel'nishe vidprats'ovana praktika takoyi diia- l'nosti u SShA, Rosiyi, krayinakh IeS ta Iaponiyi. Zokrema, u krayinakh IeS realizuiet'sia programa <<Evklid>>, Nimechchina ta Iaponiia berut' uchast' u programi Delphi za uchasti uriadiv, promislo- vosti ta naukovikh kil dlia otsiniuvannia vazhli- vosti i statusu shirokogo naboru tekhnologii. U zv'iazku z tsim s'ogodnishni doslidni proekti v galuzi shtuchnogo intelektu ta ochikuvani re- zul'tati priiniatikh dovgostrokovikh nauko- vikh strategii u silu svoieyi kul'turnoyi ta sotsi- al'noyi i potrebuiut' uvazhnogo analizu [6-12]. zaslugovuiut' znachushchosti Protiagom ostannikh desiatilit' sposteriga- losia posilennia vazhlivosti mizhdistsiplinar- nogo pidkhodu. Skladni problemi, z iakimi Meta i postanovka zavdannia Metoiu statti ie analiz osnovnikh tendentsiyi ta pidkhodiv do kontseptsiyi rozroblennia trans- Visnik KhNADU, vip. 87, 2019 portnikh zasobiv na osnovi konvergentsiyi inte- lektual'nikh kritichnikh tekhnologii. Dlia efe- ktivnogo rozroblennia transportnikh zasobiv neobkhidne vikoristannia tekhnologiyi virtual'- noyi real'nosti, sinergetichnogo pidkhodu, evo- liutsiinikh metodiv modeliuvannia, metodiv glibokogo navchannia shtuchnikh bagatosharovikh neironnikh merezh. Doslidzhennia osnovnikh tendentsii ta pidkhodiv do kontseptsiyi rozroblennia transportnikh zasobiv Vivchennia protsesiv riznoyi prirodi, shcho sa- moorganizuiut'sia, prizvelo do poiavi i rozvi- tku sinergetichnogo pidkhodu, iakii uvibrav u sebe ideyi ta pidkhodi riznikh nauk. Ideyi samoor- ganizatsiyi maiut' nadzvichaino shiroke pole zastosuvannia i v biologiyi, i v astronomiyi, i v fizitsi, i v fizichnoyi khimiyi, i v suspil'nikh nau- kakh. Sinergetichnii pidkhid rozgliadaiet'sia iak podal'shii rozvitok sistemnogo pidkhodu, shcho daie fakhivtsevi novi mozhlivosti dlia dosli- dzhennia ta zdiisnennia upravlins'koyi diial'no- sti. Sinergetika ie sistemnim pidkhodom do skladnikh vidkritikh neliniinikh sistem z yiyi vlastivostiami nestiikosti, nerivnovagi, bi- furkatsiyi, katastrofi, samoorganizatsiyi ta in. Sinergetichni doslidzhennia vidiliaiut' tri tipi samoorganizovanikh protsesiv: samozaro- dzhennia, pidtrimannia optimal'nogo rivnia, udoskonalennia i vidtvorennia. 2016 r. kompaniia Grand View Research (GVR) otsinila global'nii rinok glibokogo navchannia v 272 mln dolariv SShA. Iogo zna- chna chastina (20 %) nalezhala aviatsiino- kosmichnii ta oboronnii promislovosti. Z 2014 r. rinok glibokogo navchannia demon- struie bezperervne zrostannia. V ostann'omu zviti GVR idet'sia, shcho do kintsia 2025 r. tsei rinok dosiagne 10,2 mlrd dolariv. Oskil'ki glibinne navchannia neironnikh merezh mozhe stvoriuvati funktsiyi bez vtru- channia liudini, fakhivtsi v tsii galuzi zmozhut' zaoshchaditi bagato chasu pid chas roboti z veli- kimi danimi, spiraiuchis' na tsiu tekhnologiiu. Tse dozvoliaie yim vikoristovuvati bil'sh skla- dni nabori funktsii porivniano z traditsiinim programnim zabezpechenniam dlia mashinnogo navchannia. Gliboke navchannia - tse pidkhid, iakii mode- liuie abstraktne mislennia liudini (abo, pri- naimni, ie sproboiu nablizitisia do n'ogo), a ne vikoristovuie iogo. Odnak tsia tekhnologiia maie deiaki trudnoshchi z yiyi vikoristanniam [6]. Protses glibokogo navchannia osnovanii na analizi velikikh obsiagiv danikh. Ale potokovi efektivnogo vkhidni dani nadaiut' malo chasu dlia zabezpe- navchannia. chennia Os' chomu fakhivtsiam dovodit'sia adaptuvati svoyi algoritmi glibokogo navchannia, shchob neironni merezhi mogli obrobliati veliki ob- siagi bezperervnikh vkhidnikh danikh. protsesu Shche odna skladnist' tekhnologiyi glibokogo navchannia poliagaie v tomu, shcho vona ne mozhe nadati prichini i argumenti svoyikh visnovkiv. Na vidminu vid traditsiinogo mashinnogo na- vchannia, vi ne zmozhete pereviriti algoritm i diznatisia, chomu vasha sistema virishila, shcho, napriklad, na kartintsi zobrazhena kishka, a ne sobaka. Shchob vipraviti pomilki v algorit- makh glibinnogo navchannia, potribno pereglia- nuti ves' algoritm. Glibinne navchannia - dosit' resursnomis- tka tekhnologiia. Vona potrebuie bil'sh potuzh- nikh grafichnikh protsesoriv, visokoproduktiv- nikh videokart, velikogo obsiagu pam'iati dlia navchannia modelei i t. d. Krim togo, tsia tekhno- logiia potrebuie bil'she chasu dlia navchannia po- rivniano z traditsiinim mashinnim navchan- niam. Nezvazhaiuchi na vsi nedoliki, polipsheni metodi glibinnogo navchannia vidkrivaiut' novi mozhlivosti dlia efektivnogo analizu velikikh obsiagiv nestrukturovanikh danikh (ris. 1). Ris. 1. Priklad funktsional'noyi skhemi upravlinnia avtomobilem na osnovi metodiv glibokogo navchannia shtuchnikh bagatosharo- vikh neironnikh merezh Kompaniyi, iaki vikoristovuiut' gliboke na- vchannia u svoyikh zavdanniakh, zmozhut' otrimati bil'sh tochni rezul'tati analitiki bez neob- khidnosti vitrachati bagato chasu na navchannia sistemi. Visnik KhNADU, vip. 87, 2019 Odin z golovnikh prognoziv rozvitku vir- tual'noyi real'nosti (VR) - tekhnologiia stane bil'sh masovoiu [7]. Iakshcho 2014 r. kil'kist' koristuvachiv VR stanovila bliz'ko 200 tis., to 2017 r. tsia tsifra dosiagla 90 mln. Za pro- gnozami resursu Statista, 2019 r. vona maizhe zbil'shit'sia udvichi, do 171 mln osib. Obsiag rinku programnogo zabezpechennia dlia virtua- l'noyi real'nosti stanoviv lishe $129 mln 2015 r., i zgidno z prognozami, dosiagne $2,57 mlrd 2018 r. Analitiki Statista proro- kuiut', shcho v ts'omu rotsi zagal'na vartist' ri- nku VR stanovitime $5,2 mlrd i $45 mlrd - protiagom 2025 r. porivniano z $90 mln 2014 r. IT-laboratoriia virtual'nogo proektuvannia Volkswagen vikoristovuie tsifrovi tekhnologiyi maibutn'ogo dlia stvorennia avtomobiliv no- vogo pokolinnia. Mova ide pro formuvannia virtual'nikh modelei maibutnikh transport- nikh zasobiv z metoiu sproshchennia protsesu roz- roblennia. Za dopomogoiu grafichnogo chipa za analogiieiu z videoigrami spetsializovana pro- grama vizualizuie vsi elementi dizainu i mo- deliuvannia prototipu avtomobilia. Virtual'- nii kontsept-kar, po suti, daie zmogu viiti za mezhi zvichainogo 3D-modeliuvannia. Plat- forma Volkswagen dozvoliaie ob'iednati pov- notsinne vidchuttia prostoru z funktsional'nis- tiu. Vodii mozhe ne til'ki bachiti svii avtomobil', ale i keruvati nim. U virtual'- nomu kontsept-kare vikoristovuiut'sia prosti zhesti bez fizichnogo vplivu. Zokrema z ma- shinoiu mozhna vikonuvati vsi ti zh manipulia- tsiyi, shcho i z real'nim avtomobilem (ris. 2). Ris. 2. Virtual'nii kontsept-kar vid Volkswagen Peredovi tekhnologiyi VR dozvoliaiut' sko- rotiti vitrati na rozroblennia novikh mode- lei za rakhunok zmenshennia kil'kosti real'nikh prototipiv, kozhen z iakikh stvoriuiet'sia indi- vidual'no i potrebuie istotnikh vitrat. Krim togo, virtual'nii kontsept-kar dopomagaie za- oshchaditi chas. Oskil'ki vsi komponenti avto- mobilia proektuiut'sia v tsifrovomu prostori, yikhni parametri legko mozhna perenesti v pro- gramu virtual'noyi real'nosti i otrimati VR- model', z iakoyi mozhut' odnochasno pratsiuvati vsi chleni komandi. Volkswagen uzhe vikoristovuie virtual'ni kontsept-kari dlia rozroblennia seriinikh mo- delei, zokrema dlia Golf novogo pokolinnia. Nastupnim krokom stane stvorennia povnistiu funktsional'nogo virtual'nogo avtomobilia, shcho dozvoliaie zadiiati vsi organi chuttia. Dlia ts'ogo rozrobliaiet'sia sistema, shcho sklada- iet'sia z chutlivikh do natisnennia shtiftiv, iaki imituiut' usi formi i konturi salonu. Vona dozvolit' vidchuvati poverkhni i organi upravlinnia, iakikh ne isnuie v real'nosti (ris. 3). Ris. 3. Rukavichki virtual'noyi real'nosti z VR-sholomom Visnovki Proanalizovano osnovni tendentsiyi ta pid- khodi do kontseptsiyi rozroblennia transportnikh zasobiv na osnovi konvergentsiyi intelektual'- nikh kritichnikh tekhnologii. Dlia efektivnogo rozroblennia transportnikh zasobiv neobkhidne vikoristannia tekhnologiyi virtual'noyi real'- nosti, sinergetichnogo pidkhodu, evoliutsiinikh metodiv modeliuvannia, metodiv glibokogo na- vchannia shtuchnikh bagatosharovikh neironnikh merezh. Otzhe, natsional'ni KT maiut' kliuchove znachennia dlia rozshirennia mozhlivostei obo- ronozdatnosti Ukrayini ta dosiagnennia tsilei zokrema naukovo- natsional'noyi bezpeki, tekhnologichnoyi bezpeki. Tomu organizatsiia diia- l'nosti v tsii sferi, derzhavna pidtrimka ta stimuliuvannia KT maiut' buti prioritetom derzhavnoyi politiki. Literatura 1. Aleksiiev V.O., Aleksiiev O.P., Nikonov O.Ia. u Mekhatronika, telematika, transportnikh dodatkakh. - Kharkiv: KhNADU, 2012. - 212 s. sinergetika Visnik KhNADU, vip. 87, 2019 2. Aleksandrov Ie. Ie., Kechev M.O., Nikonov O.Ia. i tankovi avtomatichni Osnovi avtomatiki sistemi. - Kharkiv: NTU <<KhPI>>, 2002. - 163 s. 3. Nikonov O.Ia., Polosukhina T.O. Robotizirovannye avtomobili: sovremennye // tekhnologii i perspektivy Avtomobil' i Elektronika. Sovremennye tekhnologii. - Khar'kov: KhNADU, 2013. - No. 5. - S. 38-42. razvitiia 4. Nikonov O.Ia., Ul'ko V.Iu. Pobudova neliniinoyi elektrogidravlichnikh matematichnoyi modeli slidkuiuchikh bagatotsil'ovikh transportnikh zasobiv // Vestnik NTU <<KhPI>>. - Khar'kov: NTU <<KhPI>>, 2011. - No. 9. - S. 108- privodiv 5. Jackson K.L., Goessling S. Architecting Cloud Computing Solutions: Build cloud strategies that align technology and economics while effectively managing risk. - Birmingham, UK: Packt Publish- ing Ltd, 2018. - 378 r. 6. Hinton G. A practical guide to training restricted Boltzmann machines // Toronto: Machine Learn- ing Group, University of Toronto. - 2010. - Tech. Rep. 2010-000. 7. Thakral S., Manhas P., Kumar C. Virtual Reality and M-Learning // International Journal of Elec- tronic Engineering Research. - 2010. - Vol. 2. - No. 5. - P. 659-661. 8. Holland J.H. Adaptation in natural and artificial systems. An introductory analysis with application to biology, control, and artificial intelligence. - London: Bradford book edition, 1994. - 211 p. 9. Spooner J.T. Stable adaptive control and estima- tion for nonlinear systems: neural and fuzzy ap- proximator techniques. - New York: Wiley- Interscience, 2002. - 545 p. 10. Goldberg D.E. Genetic Algorithms in Search Optimizations and Machine Learning. - Addison- Wesly, 1989. - 412 p. 11. Laiq K., Shahid Q., Umair K. Comparative Anal- ysis of Adaptive NeuroFuzzy Control Techniques for Full Car Active Suspension System // Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering. - 2014. - No. 39 (3). - P. 2045-2069. 12. Bodyanskiy Y.V., Tyshchenko O.K. A Hybrid Cascade Neuro-Fuzzy Network with Pools of Extended Neo-Fuzzy Neurons and its Deep Learning // International Journal of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science. - 2019. - V. 29. - No. 3. - P. 477-488.
CONNECTIONS The Quarterly Journal Volume XIV, Number 2 Spring 2015 Russia and the Caucasus............................................................................................. 1 R. Craig Nation Norms versus Interests: The Ambiguous Nature of NATO's Democratic Conditionality in Armenia ........................................................................................ 13 Shalva Dzebisashvili The South Caucasus Between Russia and the West: How Pragmatic are the Stakeholders' Approaches? ................................................................................ 37 Gayane Novikova Russia, the EU and the South Caucasus: Forging an Efficient Over-Arching Cooperative Regional Security Scheme ................................................................... 51 Elkhan Nuriyev Sailing the South Caucasus through Troubled Waters towards Regional Integration ................................................................................................................ 65 George Vlad Niculescu Russia vs. EU/US through Georgia and Ukraine...................................................... 77 David Matsaberidze Eurasian Economic Union and the Difficulties of Integration: The Case of South Ossetia and Abkhazia ............................................................................................... 87 Elizaveta Egorova and Ivan Babin Return to Babel: The Race to Integration in the Southern Caucasus ........................ 99 Heidemaria Gurer i Russia vs. EU/US through Georgia and Ukraine David Matsaberidze * Abstract: This paper analyzes the construction and transformation of Georgia and Uk- raine's post-Soviet security strategy in the context of post-Soviet Russian foreign policy in the "near abroad," or what is often termed the "legitimate sphere" of Russian influence. After the Rose Revolution of Georgia and the Orange Revolution of Ukraine the inde- pendent/pro-Western orientation of these two countries became the main issue securitized by the Russian Federation. Therefore, maintaining territorial integrity became the top security priority for Georgia (since the early 1990s) and most likely will become the main issue for Ukraine after the Russian Federation's occupation of Crimea (March 2014) and the subsequent developments in Eastern Ukraine. The changes in the internal politics of these countries were transposed into the international competition between Russia and the EU/US, expressed through the clash of "sovereign democracy" and "Color Revolution" paradigms for the future of post-Soviet states. In essence, these are the maintenance tools of Russian influence on the one hand, and on the other hand an exercise in Western power values across the Former Soviet Union (FSU), supported with the European Neighbor- hood Policy (ENP) and the Eastern Partnership (EP) projects. The military actions of Russia in Georgia (2008) and Ukraine (2014) were a response to the soft power applied by the West and aimed at creating buffer zones in the shape of "frozen conflicts." These could be used as indirect leverage in the hands of the Russian Federation to block West- ern aspirations in Georgia and Ukraine. Introduction This paper aims to analyze the construction and transformation of the post-Soviet secu- rity perspectives of Georgia and Ukraine in the context of the post-Soviet Russian for- eign policy in the "near abroad," quite often termed the "legitimate sphere" of Russian influence by high-ranking Russian officials. This inquiry covers the panorama of the for- eign policy in post-Soviet Russia across the FSU, from the early 1990s through to the present, where Georgia and Ukraine's independent and pro-Western orientation are the main issues securitized for the Russian Federation. Accordingly, the maintenance of territorial integrity has become a security priority for Georgia since the early 1990s and will most likely be Ukraine's top concern after the Crimean occupation by the Russian Federation in March 2014 and the subsequent developments in Eastern Ukraine. There- fore, it could be claimed that post-Soviet Russian and Georgian/Ukrainian security strat- egy (following peaceful revolutions) represent a zero-sum game. The article will explore the main topics of Russian foreign policy since the dissolu- tion of the Soviet Union. On the one hand based on orthodox geopolitics, as a legitimiz- ing narrative for its sphere of influence across the FSU area, and on the other, the narra- tive of victimization of Russia and Russians by the West after the dissolution of the So- viet Union. I will show Russia is fighting against its status as a second rate country, and * David Matsaberidze is an Assistant Professor at the Department of International Relations, Ivane Javakhishvili Tbilisi State University (Georgia). THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL the evident clash of Western liberal democracy and Russian orthodoxy in the Russian Federation's foreign policy drive. The Rose and Orange revolutions of Georgia and Ukraine are considered to be major security problems by the Russian Federation, which in turn gives Georgia and Ukraine reason to leave the Russian geo-political axis. The paper will reflect on Russia's reactions to emerging changes in the near abroad since the early 1990s through the peaceful revolutions until the crises of 2008 and 2014. The second part of the study will contextualize the main transformation strategies of Russian foreign policy towards the near abroad in the process of Georgia's and Ukraine's aspirations towards EU and NATO membership. In this respect the paper will point to the main tools Russia used to successfully block this process. And last, but not least, the paper will place Russian-Georgian and Russian-Ukrainian conflicts within the wider prism of the post-Soviet contradiction between Russia and the West. For each aforementioned interaction, I will examine the security strategy and motivation of each party involved and highlight important elements. Russian Reaction to Changes in Neighboring Countries The rise to power of the national-liberation movement in Georgia (the early 1990s) and the victory of the pro-western forces in the post-velvet revolution periods in post-Soviet Georgia and Ukraine (the early 2000s) where deemed by Moscow to be a triumph of nationalists in Tbilisi and Kiev. Consequentially, Moscow securitized national minori- ties in Georgia (Abkhazians and South Ossetians) and the Russian population of Eastern Ukraine with the aim to intervene in the internal and external affairs of these countries.1 If the imminent threat of the East-West partition of Ukraine was avoided in the 1990s, Georgia witnessed two conflicts in minority-populated autonomous provinces during 1992-1993 and a full-scale war with Russia in 2008. The Civil War of the early 1990s and the secessionist conflicts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia forced Georgia to join the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in exchange for stabilizing the country and freezing conflicts over twenty percent of the country's territory. Unlike Georgia, al- though Ukraine managed to avoid a "bloody start" of the post-Soviet transition in the 1990s (a range of explanations could be found for this), the Maidan Revolution of 2014 and the full-fledged Russian occupation of Crimea, followed by the Russian-supported secessionist seizure of Lugansk and Donetsk, brought Eastern Ukraine into chaos and war. The price for stopping the bloodshed could be that Ukraine opt to join the Eurasian Union, which Putin has promoted across the FSU area. Although both Georgia and Ukraine insist on their desire to join the EU and NATO, the real destination for each of them so far has been the Association Agreement (now signed) and different types of cooperation frameworks with NATO, which are emerging as additional media towards 1 The concept of "securitization" goes back to the Copenhagen School and refers to a process of extreme politicization enabling state actors to transform subjects into matters of "security." Cf. Barry Buzan, Ole Waever, and Jaap de Wilde, Security: A New Framework for Analysis (Boul- der: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1998), 25. SPRING 2015 the Membership Action Plan (MAP). Nevertheless, external constraints leading to cau- tion on the part of the EU and NATO in their ascension policy can hardly be denied. So, what is the main problem for Russia? Firstly, the fact that the "Soviet Union merely transposed the Russian Empire to the twentieth century, and state-building efforts of Russian leaders, such as Putin, are similarly hostage to such pre-determined paths [...] Imperial Russia and the Soviet Union both resulted in a similar blend of authoritarian- 2 The Rose and Orange Revolutions ism, militaristic expansion and defensive paranoia." in Georgia and Ukraine alarmed Moscow. These were the very first signals of the future eastward expansion of EU and U.S. interests. The term "sovereign democracy" entered the political lexicon as Moscow's response to the pro-democracy "color revolutions" in the post-Soviet states.3 The man behind the term, "sovereign democracy," former dep- uty prime minister and close adviser to Putin, Vladislav Surkov, outlined his thinking in The Nationalization of the Future: Paragraphs pro Sovereign Democracy, which may be summarized as: "The striving for political wholeness and centralized power, the idealization of goals and the personification of politics" [...] "Russia was governed by a ruling class with a strong patriotic vision of the country's development and undoubtedly it drew on the long tradition of national self-affirmation against real and perceived ene- 4 Thus, the clash between the two ideologies--the liberal democracy of the West, mies." promoted in the near abroad of Russia through the velvet revolutions, and "sovereign democracy" of Russia--is quite apparent. There is no doubt that the velvet revolutions, starting in Serbia and stretching across the FSU area, including Kyrgyzstan in Central Asia, were an alarm signal for Moscow. Russia was further irritated by the recognition of Kosovo, which clearly demonstrated the failure of the Kremlin's Orthodox paradigm. Russia was unable to lend a hand to Serbia back in 1999-2000 during the NATO bombing. The velvet revolutions were the events that triggered a gradual transformation of Russian foreign policy into an openly aggressive stance towards its near abroad. On April 18, 2014, during his address to the Russian parliament, President Putin justified the annexation of Crimea by citing the humiliation Russia had suffered due to many broken promises by the West, including the alleged promise not to enlarge NATO beyond the borders of reunified Germany, stress- ing that "for 20 years the narrative of the alleged 'broken promise' of not enlarging 5 As Bruce Riedel, NATO eastward is part and parcel of Russia's post-Soviet identity." 2 Christopher Leigh, "Back to the Future? Pre-Soviet History and Political Thought in the Putin Era," Post-Soviet Politics: Politics, Foreign Policy and Strategic Competition, 3 October 2013, available at https://postsovietpolitics.wordpress.com/2013/10/03/back-to-the-future-pre- soviet-history-and-political-thought-in-the-putin-era/ (accessed September 2014). Ibid. Ibid. 5 Michael Ruhle, "NATO Enlargement and Russia: Myths and Realities," NATO Review Maga- zine, available at www.nato.int/docu/review/2014/Russia-Ukraine-Nato-crisis/Nato-enlargement- Russia/EN/index.htm?utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=NATO Update 201428&utm_ content= NATO Update 201428+CID_d7f1ec1c9fbe29cc74da6e18a05c8a00&utm_source= Email marketing software&utm_term=More (accessed September, 2014). THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL Senior Fellow and Director of the Brookings Intelligence Project, admits, "Vladimir Putin's strategic goal is to undo the results of the defeat of the Soviet Union that the CIA's secret support for the Afghan mujahedin accomplished in 1989 [...] for Putin it 6 Similarly, in 2009 Gorba- was the 'greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the century'." chev himself recalled that "the United States [...] pledged that after Germany's reunifica- 7 whereas in 2007 dur- tion in 1990 'NATO would not move a centimeter to the east'," ing the Munich Security Conference, Putin stressed: "it turns out that NATO has put its 8 In a frontline forces on our borders and we [...] do not react to these actions at all." broader perspective, if Russia's real intentions in 2008 were masked by the pretext of minority protection in the Tskhinvali Region (formerly referred to as South Ossetia dur- ing the Soviet era), as President Putin claimed at that time, the aggression in Ukraine in 2014 was an act of revenge, by Putin himself, for past humiliation. Russian Revenge: Blocking Georgia and Ukraine from the EU and NATO? Russian revenge has two dimensions: practical and ideological. The former is neatly highlighted by NATO's Defence Planning Committee: "Russia's ability and intent to undertake significant military actions without much warning represents a far-reaching 9 whereas threat to the maintenance of security and stability in the Euro-Atlantic zone," the latter is succinctly summarized by Aleksandr Dugin, who writes about the clash of religious civilizations and the danger that Russian orthodoxy faces in the modern age, linking Catholic expansion to NATO expansion: "here the geopolitical sense is more complex. Catholicism symbolizes Europe, the same way as Orthodoxy symbolizes Rus- sia. The provoked conflict hinders the development of Russian-European relations [...] who stands to gain from this? Neither Europe, nor Russia, nor the Vatican, nor the Rus- sian Orthodox Church. Only the U.S. does. We are for dialogue with Catholicism: but in this case there is no dialogue but provocation, analogous to NATO's eastward expan- sion." Russia became particularly insulted due to the decision of a number of former Soviet republics or "allies" in Eastern Europe to join NATO and the EU (two very different "creatures" in Russia's eyes in terms of threat perception and acceptability) and due to U.S. support of pro-Western governments in countries such as Georgia and Ukraine.11 The Orange Revolution in Ukraine and the Rose Revolution in Georgia culminated with 6 Justin Lynch, "Putin's Machiavellian Moment," The Weekly Wonk, 24 July 24 2014, available at http://weeklywonk.newamerica.net/articles/putins-machiavellian-moment (accessed Septem- ber 2014). 7 Andreas M. Bock, "Too Blind to See the Threat We Pose to Russia," European Union For- eign Affairs Journal 3 (2014): 50. Ibid., 50. Ibid., 52. 10 Leigh, "Back to the Future." 11 Thanos Dokos, "How the EU got it so Wrong in Ukraine," Europe's World, 24 April 2014, available at http://europesworld.org/2014/04/24/how-the-eu-got-it-so-wrong-in-ukraine/ (ac- cessed September 2014). SPRING 2015 two power elites who envisioned the future of their respective countries in the EU and NATO. Precisely because the two organizations' respective enlargement processes are not intended as anti-Russian projects, they are open-ended and--paradoxically--bound to be perceived by Russia as a permanent assault on its status and influence.12 This is the main security threats to the Russian state: with the incorporation of Georgia and Ukraine into the EU and NATO, the so called "buffer zone" between Russia and the West will disappear and the military block will border Russia itself. Thus, if the August War of 2008 was a Russian attempt to stop Georgia's aspiration to join NATO and the EU, or at least to transform it into a more vague promise for the future, the Ukrainian Crisis reveals Putin's true desire, with broader intentions. It could be seen as "a reunification of Russian lands and Russian souls, mirroring the process of German re-unification in 1990 and [...] a national reconstruction entailing some sort of 13 The two cases of military revisionism of the post-Soviet geopolitical settlement." drive of the post-Soviet Russian foreign policy in Georgia (2008) and in Ukraine (2014) can be seen as revenge for the humiliation of Russia in early 2000s. Considering the fact that the NATO bombing campaign on Serbia was seen as a catastrophic humiliation in Russian foreign policy circles, Putin is now intent on reasserting Russian strength and gaining respect on the world stage.14 There is no argument against the claim that in 2008 Russia attempted to use Kosovo's de facto independence after the NATO interven- tion as justification for obtaining international recognition of Abkhazia and South Os- setia. During the 2008 war between Russia and Georgia Putin sent a clear message that he was prepared to use military force to promote foreign policy objectives.15 Obviously, the occupation of Crimea, Abkhazia and South Ossetia are relatively similar develop- ments and newly emerged problems in qualitative terms, but undoing their results would be much harder in Crimea than in Abkhazia or South Ossetia, considering the Russian co-ethnicity in the area. However, this will depend on the decisiveness of western coun- tries to withstand the Russian Federation's new military policy towards its near abroad. The main goal for Russia--to create buffer zones between the Russian Federation and the EU/NATO structures--can be reached by creating frozen, or what would be fro- zen, conflicts in Georgia and Ukraine respectively. For the time being, Georgian and Ukrainian efforts to seek effective membership in the EU and NATO are blocked in light of the August War of 2008 and the Ukrainian Crisis of 2014. According to Vicen Cheterian, international competition was the main cause of the August War and the main source of instability in the Caucasus - a result of "increasing engagement (and competi- 12 Ruhle, "NATO Enlargement and Russia." 13 Roberto Orsi, "The Irreversible Crisis of the Ukrainian Experiment," Security Studies Unit (SSU) / Policy Alternatives Research Institute (PARI), available at http://pari.u-tokyo.ac.jp/eng/ unit/ssu/articles/orsi20140507.html (accessed September 2014). 14 Leigh, "Back to the Future." 15 Dokos, "How the EU got it so Wrong." THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL tion)--both military and economic--between the two major powers - the United States and Russia." The Case of Georgia I would argue that it was not the developments of pre-August 2008 in particular that brought change to the conflict zones of Georgia, but rather the premeditated activities of all actors, resulting in changes in their external allegiances. A broader pretext of the Au- gust War could be constructed, stretching its roots back to 2001. "What really changed the situation was the change of administration in Russia the following year. Vladimir Putin came to power and gradually instituted policies to punish Georgia, end Abkhazia's isolation, and change the balance of power in the conflict," De Waal claims.17 Ronald D. Asmus adds, "Moscow had little interest in a resolution of these conflicts which 18 thus supporting the idea could have allowed Georgia to go to the West even faster," that the openly declared pro-western, pro-EU and pro-NATO course of the Rose Revo- lution government was particularly alarming for Moscow. Russia could not tolerate en- circlement by NATO member states. According to Asmus, the August War was the start of a long chain that was not only directed against Georgia or at a regime change in the country, but also aimed at undermining European security: "an increasingly nationalist and revisionist Russia was also rebelling against the European system that it felt no longer met its interests and had been imposed on it during a moment of temporary weak- 19 The August War was a test ground for future actions in Europe, as "through the ness." August War Russia managed to win out over its more powerful competitors in its most volatile and vulnerable borderland - the Caucasus frontier." Russia did not even hide its intentions at that time. Dmitry Rogozin, the Russian en- voy to NATO, mentioned that "as soon as Georgia gets some kind of prospect from Washington [in terms] of NATO membership [...] the next day the process of real seces- 21 This is an indirect testament to sion of these two territories from Georgia will begin." 16 Vicken Cheterian, "The Big Re-Freeze - Has the Regional Balance of Power Merely Cooled into a Different Configuration?" The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), avail- able at http://www.iiss.org/programmes/russia-and-eurasia/about/georgian-russian-dialogue/ caucasus-security-insight/vicken-cheterian/the-big-re-freeze (accessed May 2011). 17 Thomas de Waal, The Caucasus - An Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 18 Ronald D. Asmus, A Little War that Shook the World - Georgia, Russia and the Future of the West (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010), 4. 19 Ibid., 4. 20 Ronald G. Suny, "Russia has Taken on Its Powerful Competitors for the First Time Since 1991," The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), available at http://www.iiss.org/ programmes/russia-and-eurasia/about/georgian-russian-dialogue/caucasus-security-insight/ ronald-suny/a-watershed-in-east-west-relations (accessed May 2011). 21 David J. Smith, "The Saakashvili Administration's Reaction to Russian Policies Before the 2008 War," in The Guns of August 2008 - Russia's War in Georgia, ed. Svante E. Cornell and Frederick S. Starr (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2009), 125. SPRING 2015 the claim that Russia was comfortable with the status of the frozen conflicts as there were no real aspirations towards Euro-Atlantic structures on the part of Georgia. As soon as Saakashvili's government openly embarked on a pro-western path with the aim of bringing more security to the country, looking for possible solutions to Georgia's secessionist troubles, the need for immediate action in the conflict zones against the Georgian government became clear to Moscow. The resolution of these conflicts was the main prerequisite for Georgia's membership in NATO, hence playing the secession- ist territories against Georgia would bring Russia its desired goals - to counter Geor- gia's pro-western, anti-Russian aspirations. Military intervention was the final measure undertaken by the Russian Federation against Georgia. The Case of Ukraine Similar reasoning could be valid for Russia's actions in Ukraine. The following aspects are listed as the main motivations: "foreign policy concerns, especially worries about Ukraine building closer ties with Europe in general and NATO in particular are behind 22 It could be argued that the quick action of Russia, Kremlin policy toward Ukraine." first in Crimea and later in eastern Ukraine, was due to the surprising success of the Maidan and advancement of the Eastern Partnership Program to the Association Agree- ment, which was seen by Russia as a stepping stone to organizations such as NATO, whose eastward expansion was seen by Russian security officials as a major threat.23 However, some experts blame the EU itself for granting Russia "free reign" over Ukraine. In this respect, they point to the personal friendship between Gerhard Schroder and Vladimir Putin, leading the latter to yield to the international deal for the construc- tion of the Nord Stream gas pipeline, transporting natural gas under the Baltic Sea from the Russian Vybord directly to the German gas hub in Greifswald, which effectively by- passed Ukraine, and its possible geopolitical instability, which materialized with great punctuality.24 In this context, could one argue for a clash of the two security matrices-- of the EU and Russia--in the process of shaping energy security diversification projects across the FSU countries, Georgia and Ukraine? And if so, how will the EU/U.S. pro- jects promoting liberal democracy withstand Russian energy and military policy? Different Timing, Similar Outcomes What problems have resulted for Georgia and Ukraine locally, and for EU/US interna- tionally? Firstly, there is the issue of territorial integrity. The key to resolving the border violations lies with the Kremlin. In seeking a way out of the civil war and constant de- feats in the war in Abkhazia, Georgia joined the CIS in December 1993. Afraid that 22 Timothy Frye, "A Tale of Two Russian Narratives," Perspectives on Peace & Security, August 2014, available at http://perspectives.carnegie.org/us-russia/a-tale-of-two-russian-narratives/ (accessed September 2014). 23 Robert McMahon, "Ukraine in Crisis," Council on Foreign Relations, 25 August 2014, avail- able at http://www.cfr.org/ukraine/ukraine-crisis/p32540 (accessed September 2014). 24 Orsi, "Irreversible Crisis." THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL Russia would recognize the independence of secessionist regions, Georgia more or less paid tribute to Moscow until 2008 in the management and direction of its domestic and foreign policies. Similarly, Ukraine is currently ready to consider the option of joining the Eurasian Union, if it can secure peace in Eastern Ukraine. Although, having had negative experiences in the past, Ukraine and European countries do not trust Russia, but similarly to Georgia in the 1990s, they are currently stuck between a rock and a hard place - a deep-frozen conflict at the border of Europe or a total erosion of the European security system, whereas Russia successfully managed to securitize national minorities in its near abroad in service to its foreign policy interests - Abkhazians and South Os- setians in Georgia and Russians in Ukraine. The alleged motives of the early 1990s-- protecting national minorities in a neighboring country, Georgia--were cemented into the national security concept upon being given passports: Russia will defend its citizens all over the world by any means necessary. The same policy was devised vis-a-vis Ukraine in respect to Crimea. To this end, Putin initiated changes to the security concept note of the Russian Federation. Thus, Russia's actions in its near abroad bring some constraints to the EU's choices to lend a hand to its partners in the FSU area. Collision of Russian and Western Paradigms Georgia and Ukraine are not Russia's primary objectives; rather, they are tools for gain- ing leverage over the West. This clash between Russia and the West was not the case in 2008 and 2014, but the expression of the broader post-Soviet contradiction of two main paradigms: orthodoxy or Orthodox geopolitics for the FSU area, promoted by Russia, and the spread of liberal democracy and western values, promoted by the EU and the U.S. Qualitatively these are Russia's tools to maintain its influence on the one hand, and an exertion of Western values and power across the FSU area, on the other. Russia is successful in transferring "ethnic" problems to outside its borders, for instance to Abkhazia and South Ossetia in the 1990s and Chechnya in the early 2000s. However, the August War of 2008 signaled a shift in Russia's foreign policy approach - a direct intervention where it was deemed necessary, which is proved by the case of Ukraine in As a counter narrative, the West suggested an umbrella of European values for those who would share it, proposing tools for political rapprochement, such as the European Neighborhood Policy (ENP) and the Eastern Partnership (EP). Although these tools trig- gered Georgia and Ukraine to adopt successful foreign policy, driven by cultural values, which gradually led them to depart from the Russian Orthodox camp, they have some gaps. Namely, they do not provide new partners and would-be members with protection from Russian aggression, as demonstrated in 2008 and in 2014 in the cases of Georgia and Ukraine, respectively. In addition, if this drive for detachment from Russia became a "mental revolution" for Georgia, as declared by Saakashvili, this kind of separation would be difficult for Ukraine due to its ethnic diversity. Nevertheless, one overall conclusion can be made: through its wars in Georgia and Ukraine, Russia broke down the foundations of the Russian Orthodox camp, meaning that relations between Russia SPRING 2015 and Ukraine would never be the same again. Nevertheless, it presented a serious chal- lenge to the modern system of European security. Still, this is not only an ideological and political problem. Russia's intervention in Georgia and Ukraine demonstrates that Russia could easily shift from applying soft power to hard power when it deems it necessary for the protection of its foreign policy interests. Russia will not tolerate the possibility of losing influence over the FSU area and will use soft or hard power to maintain it. It has demonstrated this in the gas war with Georgia and Ukraine following the velvet revolutions of 2003 and 2004 (soft power) and through the military interventions in Georgia and Ukraine in 2008 and 2014 (hard power). It could be claimed that these are not only problems for Georgia and Ukraine, as Russia staged these crises across the European periphery, which proved to be quite vulnerable. In turn, the EU found itself unable to foresee the real desires of Rus- sia in the August War, thereby allowing for the Ukrainian Crisis, which were the first military inter-state conflicts in Europe after the Balkan Wars of the 1990s. Conclusion The transformation of Russian foreign policy in the post-Soviet period in the near abroad and the subsequent developments in Georgia and Ukraine demonstrate some radical similarities. These are mainly issues that became represented, and later on securi- tized, both in Georgia and Ukraine. These include Georgia's territorial integrity and independence in the early 1990s and independent foreign policy choices since the 2000s. Following the Rose Revolution, in particular, Georgia became threatened by Russia within the framework of its post-Soviet foreign or strategic interests in the near abroad. The same problems emerged for Ukraine after 2004, when Ukraine's foreign policy choices became securitized by Russia and in 2014, when the division or partition of Ukraine became a real problem for the country. In this context, the erosion of the Russian Orthodox paradigm is apparent: after the events of 2008 in Georgia and 2014 in Ukraine, Russia could not hope for the success of the Orthodox camp, but it is questionable as to whether this can be altered through mili- tary means. Arguably, the wars of 2008 and 2014 could be seen as reactions to the suc- cess of the velvet revolutions that encircled the Russian Federation in the region. The wars were aimed at altering the changing international realities in the near abroad. As for the domestic market, the Kremlin proposed the concept of sovereign democracy as an alternative paradigm to the liberal democracy promoted by the West. In addition, the aforementioned wars were not revenge for the velvet revolutions--a sign of the rude interference of the West in Russia's near abroad--but the reaction to Russia's interna- tional humiliation. The humiliation began with German reunification, continued through the precedent of Kosovo and concluded with the EU's eastward expansion to Ukraine's borders. Thus, the soft power applied by the West was countered by military means by the Russian Federation. Russia's drive was aimed at creating buffer zones in Georgia and Ukraine by initiating "frozen conflicts," which could be used as indirect leverage in the hands of the Russian Federation to block the progress of Western aspirations in those THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL two countries. The fact that both the EU and NATO are neither ready to provide meaningful tools for the resolution of these problems, nor accept any new member with territorial problems within the state, or with another state, is a testament to the regretta- ble reality: Russia has an indirect veto right on the EU's and NATO's expansion policy in its near abroad and no longer tolerates Western expansion into former Soviet states. Russia's use of military action to exercise its interests became visible through emerging security challenges at the borders of the EU, where the "termination of the eastward 25 Whatever the final outcome, it expansion of NATO may serve as a bargaining chip." is evident that solving these geopolitical and security challenges are at the top of the EU's current agenda. 25 Bock, "Too Blind to See," 53. SPRING 2015 Bibliography Asmus, Ronald D.. A Little War that Shook the World - Georgia, Russia and the Future of the West . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. Bock, Andreas M.. "Too Blind to See the Threat We Pose to Russia." European Union Foreign Affairs Journal 3 (2014): 50. Buzan, Barry, Jaap de Wilde, and Ole Waeve. Security: A New Framework for Analysis. Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1998. Cheterian, Vicken. The Big Re-Freeze - Has the Regional Balance of Power Merely Cooled into a Different Configuration?. The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), 2011. de Waal, Thomas. The Caucasus - An Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press, Dokos, Thanos. "How the EU got it so Wrong in Ukraine." Europe's World (2014). Frye, Timothy. "A Tale of Two Russian Narratives." Perspectives on Peace & Security (2014). Leigh, Christopher. "Back to the Future? Pre-Soviet History and Political Thought in the Putin Era." Post-Soviet Politics: Politics, Foreign Policy and Strategic Competition (2013). Lynch, Justin. "Putin's Machiavellian Moment." The Weekly Wonk (2014). McMahon, Robert. Ukraine in Crisis. Council on Foreign Relations, 2014. Orsi, Roberto. The Irreversible Crisis of the Ukrainian Experiment In Security Studies Unit (SSU). Policy Alternatives Research Institute (PARI), 2014. Ruhle, Michael. "NATO Enlargement and Russia: Myths and Realities." NATO Review Magazine (2014). Smith, David J.. "The Saakashvili Administration's Reaction to Russian Policies Before the 2008 War." In The Guns of August 2008 - Russia's War in Georgia, 125. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2009. Suny, Ronald G.. Russia has Taken on Its Powerful Competitors for the First Time Since 1991. The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), 2011
dal'nevostoChnyI veKtor sovetsKoI vneShneI PolitiKi DOI 10.15826/izv2.2018.20.2.023 udK 94(470:520)"1980/1985" + 327.54 M. E. Elkin Tomskii gosudarstvennyi universitet tomsk, rossiia DINAMIKA RAZVITIIa SOVETSKO-IaPONSKIKh OTNOShENII V PERVOI POLOVINE 1980-kh gg. v dannoi stat'e rassmatrivaiutsia osnovnye tendentsii i obshchaia dinamika raz- vitiia dvustoronnikh otnoshenii mezhdu sssr i iaponiei v period 1980-1985 gg. glavnoi tsel'iu dannogo issledovaniia iavliaetsia analiz riada sobytii i iavle- nii, proizoshedshikh kak vnutri samoi iaponii, tak i na mezhdunarodnoi arene, sledstviem kotorykh stala rezkaia smena kharaktera vneshnepoliticheskogo kursa iaponskogo pravitel'stva po sovetskomu napravleniiu s vzaimovygodnogo sotrud- nichestva na otkryto konfrontatsionnyi, napolnennyi neskryvaemym anti- sovetizmom. v stat'e rassmatrivaiutsia deistviia pravitel'stv oboikh gosudarstv, tak ili inache povliiavshikh na sovetsko-iaponskie otnosheniia v ukazannyi period. avtorom otmecheno, chto pozitivnye tendentsii v sovetsko-iaponskikh otnosheniiakh na rubezhe 1970-kh i 1980-kh gg. ne ustraivali predstavitelei tekh politicheskikh krugov iaponii, kotorye schitali, chto strana dolzhna byla sdelat' stavku na povy- shenie sobstvennoi roli v mire cherez solidarnost' s global'noi politikoi sSha i vozvrat k kholodnoi voine. na osnove provedennogo issledovaniia avtor prishel k vyvodu, chto nesmotria na postoiannye proiavleniia sovetskoi storonoi zhelaniia naladit' dobrososedskie otnosheniia s iaponiei, kharakter sovetsko- iaponskikh otnoshenii k kontsu pervoi poloviny 1980-kh gg. dostig samogo nizkogo urovnia razvitiia vplot' do otkrytoi vrazhdebnosti. v kachestve osnovnykh prichin takoi negativnoi dinamiki avtor ukazyvaet smenu vneshnepoliticheskogo kursa iaponskogo pravitel'stva, vovlechennost' v voenno-politicheskuiu strategiiu sSha, nalichie nereshennoi territorial'noi problemy s sovetskim soiuzom, a takzhe voennoe usilenie dal'nego vostoka kak priamuiu ugrozu natsional'noi bezopasnosti iaponii. K l iu ch e v y e s l o v a: iaponiia; vneshniaia politika iaponii; sovetsko-iaponskie otnosheniia; kontseptsiia <<kompleksnogo obespecheniia natsional'noi bezopasnosti>>; kholodnaia voina. Ts i t i r o v a n i e: Elkin M. E. dinamika razvitiia sovetsko-iaponskikh otnoshenii v pervoi polovine 1980-kh gg. // izv. ural. feder. un-ta. ser. 2 : gumanitar. nauki. 2018. t. 20. No. 2 (175). s. 38-46. Postupila v redaktsiiu 04.08.2017 Priniata k pechati 18.04.2018 (c) elkin M. e., 2018 izvestiia urFu. seriia 2. gumanitarnye nauki. 2018. t. 20. No. 2 (175) M. E. Elkin. razvitie sovetsko-iaponskikh otnoshenii v pervoi polovine 1980-kh gg. Maxim E. Elkin Tomsk State University Tomsk, Russia THE DEVELOPMENT DYNAMICS OF THE JAPAN-SOVIET UNION RELATIONS IN THE FIRST HALF OF THE 1980s The author considers the tendencies and dynamics of the development of bilateral relations between the USSR and Japan between 1980 and 1985. The main purpose of this study is to analyse the events taking place in Japan and in the world, which resulted in a drastic change in the foreign policy of the Japanese government as regarded the Soviet Union from mutually beneficial cooperation to open confrontation replete with unconcealed anti-Sovietism. The article carefully examines the actions of the go vernments of both states directly or indirectly affecting the Japan-Soviet Union relations of the period. The author notes that the positive tendencies in the Japan- Soviet Union relations at the turn of the 1970s did not suit the representatives of the political circles in Japan who believed that the country should increase its role in the world by means of solidarity with the US global policy and a return to the Cold War. Referring to the analysis, the author concludes that despite the constant demon- stration by the Soviet Union of a desire to establish good neighbourly relations with Japan, the Japan-Soviet Union relations had reached their lowest level to the point of open confrontation by the end of the first half of the 1980s. According to the author, the main reasons for such negative dynamics were the change in the foreign policy of the Japanese government for consistency with the military strategy of the United States, the unsolved territorial issue, and the military strengthening of the Far East as a direct threat to the national security of Japan. K e y w o r d s: Japan; Foreign Policy of Japan; Japan-Soviet Union relations; concept of "the comprehensive national defence"; Cold War. C i t a t i o n: Elkin, M. E. (2018). Dinamika razvitiia sovetsko-iaponskikh otnoshenii v pervoi polovine 1980-kh gg. [The Development Dynamics of the Japan-Soviet Union Relations in the First Half of the 1980s]. Izvestia. Ural Federal University Journal. Series 2: Humanities and Arts, 20, 2 (175), 38-46. Submitted on 04 August, 2017 Accepted on 18 April, 2018 na protiazhenii svoei istorii (1922-1991) sovetsko-iaponskie otnosheniia otlichalis' napriazhennost'iu, kotoraia imela glubokie istoricheskie korni, vo vremenakh, kogda proiskhodila bor'ba za gospodstvo v severo-vostochnoi azii. istoriia diplomaticheskikh otnoshenii mezhdu sssr i iaponiei beret nachalo s 1925 g., kogda byli nalazheny sviazi na urovne posol'stv dvukh gosudarstv. imenno normalizatsiia dvustoronnikh otnoshenii stala glavnym soderzhaniem nachal'nogo etapa vzaimodeistviia dvukh stran. samym protivorechivym etapom v otnosheniiakh etikh gosudarstv iavliaetsia zakliuchitel'nyi period v istorii ikh vzaimodeistviia, a imenno pervaia izvestiia urFu. seriia 2. gumanitarnye nauki. 2018. t. 20. No. 2 (175) dal'nevostoChnyI veKtor sovetsKoI vneShneI PolitiKi polovina 1980-kh gg. dannyi period kharakterizuetsia izmeneniem kharaktera sovetsko-iaponskikh otnoshenii s napravlennogo na druzheskoe sosushchestvovanie i sotrudnichestvo na otkryto vrazhdebnyi. nachalom razvitiia sovetsko-iaponskikh otnoshenii rassmatrivaemogo perioda mozhno schitat' sovmestnoe zaiavlenie, podpisannoe v 1973 g. vo vremia vizita v sssr iaponskogo prem'er-ministra tanaki Kakuei. v khode peregovorov bylo vyrazheno oboiudnoe udovletvorenie po povodu togo, chto s momenta podpisaniia sovmestnoi deklaratsii 1956 g. otnosheniia mezhdu sssr i iaponiei poluchili blagopriiatnoe razvitie: prodvizhenie v politicheskoi, ekonomicheskoi i kul'- turnoi oblastiakh [Period of President Tanaka's Leadership]. Primerami dannykh uluchshenii mozhno nazvat' uvelichenie dvustoronnei torgovli, zakliuchenie soglashenii ob ekonomicheskom sotrudnichestve, otkrytie aviasoobshcheniia mezhdu Moskvoi i tokio. odnako dannye izmeneniia v sovetsko-iaponskikh otnosheniiakh ne ustraivali predstavitelei tekh politicheskikh krugov iaponii, kotorye otvechali za for- mirovanie i prodvizhenie novoi kontseptsii <<kompleksnogo obespecheniia bez- opasnosti iaponii>>. s ikh tochki zreniia strana dolzhna byla sdelat' stavku na solidarnost' s politikoi sSha, vozvrat k kholodnoi voine, otkaz ot razriadki v pol'zu konfrontatsii [aliev, s. 149]. obosnovaniem dannogo nezhelaniia sotrudnichestva s sovetskim soiuzom stal <<territorial'nyi vopros>>. takzhe negativnoe vliianie na iapono-sovetskie otno- sheniia okazalo podpisanie dogovora o mire i druzhbe mezhdu iaponiei i Kitaem v 1978 g. [Petrov, s. 66]. ochevidno, chto dannyi dogovor byl po bol'shei chasti napravlen protiv sssr, o chem govorit vkliuchenie polozheniia o <<protivodei- stvii usiliiam liuboi tret'ei strany (ili gruppy stran) ustanovit' gegemoniiu v aziatsko-tikhookeanskom regione>>. v sootvetstvii s dannoi formulirovkoi iaponskoe pravitel'stvo planirovalo okazat' davlenie na sovetskii soiuz, tem samym vynudiv ego na territorial'nye i inogo roda ustupki radi nedo- pushcheniia formirovaniia nekoego aziatskogo <<antisovetskogo bloka>> mezhdu iapo- niei i Kitaem. so svoei storony, Moskva vynuzhdena byla vystupit' v oon s zaiavleniem o svoei ozabochennosti novymi tendentsiiami iaponskoi politiki. dal'neishee ukhudshenie otnoshenii mezhdu dvumia gosudarstvami prodolzha- los' i v nachale 1980-kh gg. v pervuiu ochered', uzhestochilas' politika iaponii v otnoshenii Moskvy. iaponiia ne tol'ko sokrashchala politicheskie kontakty s sssr, no takzhe priniala reshenie o tormozhenii ekonomicheskogo sotrudni- chestva i sderzhivanii kul'turnykh i turisticheskikh sviazei. glavnoi prichinoi etogo nazyvalas' tsel' ukrepleniia pozitsii kapitalizma v bor'be s global'nym sotsializmom, i v kachestve povoda k nachalu dannoi politiki byl ispol'zovan vvod sovetskoi armii v afganistan. ochevidno, chto takim obrazom iaponiia stremilas' povysit' svoiu rol' v global'noi voennoi strategii sSha. v pod- tverzhdenie vysheskazannogo v 1979 g. glava Mid iaponii okita saburo zaiavil, chto iaponiia prisoediniaetsia k sanktsiiam zapadnoi evropy i sSha v otnoshenii sssr [Petrov, s. 68]. izvestiia urFu. seriia 2. gumanitarnye nauki. 2018. t. 20. No. 2 (175) M. E. Elkin. razvitie sovetsko-iaponskikh otnoshenii v pervoi polovine 1980-kh gg. vnutri iaponii dlia obosnovaniia novogo vneshnepoliticheskogo kursa aktivno shla propaganda o <<vozrastanii sovetskoi ugrozy>>, osnovnoi tezis kotoroi zvuchal tak: <<afganistan -- lish' odna iz zhertv sovetskogo ekspansionizma, v chisle kotorykh mozhet okazat'sia i iaponiia>> [Gong Tong Sheng Ming . Wai Jiao Qing Shu . 465 Ye ]. v eto zhe vremia byli otvergnuty predlozheniia sssr zakliuchit' dogovor o dobro- sosedstve i sotrudnichestve. Pri etom dannoe predlozhenie bylo predstavleno praviashchei liberal'no-demokraticheskoi partiei iaponii kak <<pervyi shag k zakhvatu iaponii>> [Koshkin, s. 276]. odnako, na moi vzgliad, ne stoit zaostriat' vnimanie na afganskikh sobytiiakh, kotorye byli ispol'zovany dlia provedeniia zaranee zaplanirovannogo kursa na uzhestochenie sovetskogo napravleniia iaponskoi politiki. v podderzhku takoi tochki zreniia mozhno privesti to, chto pozitsii iaponii i sssr, kak i ranee, korennym obrazom otlichalis' drug ot druga: sovetskoe pravitel'stvo vsemi silami stremilos' k zakliucheniiu sovetsko-iaponskogo dogovora o dobrososed- stve i sotrudnichestve, ne vkliuchaia v nego polozhenii o territorial'nom voprose, a dlia iaponii <<mirnyi dogovor>> imel smysl lish' v sluchae vozvrashcheniia chetyrekh ostrovov. takim obrazom, sovetsko-iaponskie otnosheniia, pri takoi tendentsii, v liubom sluchae zashli by v tupik. imenno territorial'naia problema stala universal'nym sredstvom iaponskoi vlasti v sovetskom napravlenii vneshnei politiki. iarkim primerom mozhno schitat' tak nazyvaemuiu kampaniiu <<za vozvrashchenie severnykh territorii>>. glavnoi tsel'iu iavlialos', konechno zhe, vozvrashchenie iaponii iuzhnokuril'skikh ostrovov posredstvom propagandistskoi deiatel'nosti. tak, 7 fevralia 1981 g. bylo ofitsial'no ob'iavleno <<dnem severnykh territorii>>, i s etogo momenta kampaniia priobrela kharakter gosudarstvennoi. <<den' severnykh territorii>> byl natselen na to, chtoby do okonchatel'nogo vozvrashcheniia iaponii severnykh ter- ritorii, posredstvom spetsial'nykh meropriiatii, ezhegodno podtverzhdat' svoiu reshimost' k ikh vozvrashcheniiu. odnovremenno s etim vo vsekh prefekturakh iaponii byli sformirovany sovety << po voprosam vozvrashcheniia severnykh territorii>> i uchastilis' tak nazyvaemye poezdki <<dlia osmotra severnykh territorii>> chlenami iaponskogo pravitel'stva, nosivshie iavno provokatsionnyi kharakter. so svoei storony sovetskoe pravitel'stvo na stol' provokatsionnye mery otvetilo interesnoi pozitsiei. Moskva otkryto zaiavliala, chto <<ne vidit nikakogo nereshennogo "territorial'nogo voprosa" v sovetsko-iaponskikh otnosheniiakh>> i nedoumevaet, pochemu v poslednee vremia deistviia iaponskogo pravitel'stva v otnoshenii sssr priobretaiut vse bol'shuiu vrazhdebnost' i vygliadiat kak soznatel'nye popytki ukhudsheniia sovetsko-iaponskikh otnoshe- nii [tam zhe, s. 278]. sleduet otmetit', chto sovetskii soiuz ne otkazyvalsia ot idei podpisaniia mirnogo dogovora mezhdu dvumia stranami, odnako na svoikh usloviiakh. liubaia popytka iaponii vkliuchit' v soglashenie <<territorial'nyi vopros>> soprovozhdalas' rezkoi kritikoi so storony sovetskogo pravitel'stva, kotoroe obvinialo iaponiiu v netrezvom i nevernom vzgliade kak na istoriiu, tak i na real'noe sostoianie del. izvestiia urFu. No. 2 (175) dal'nevostoChnyI veKtor sovetsKoI vneShneI PolitiKi imenno iz-za togo, chto pozitsiia sssr sostoiala v tom, chto <<territorial'noi problemy>> v sovetsko-iaponskikh otnosheniiakh net, dlia iaponskogo pravitel'stva pervostepennoi zadachei stalo pobudit' sovetskoe pravitel'stvo kak minimum ofitsial'no priznat' sushchestvovanie territorial'nogo voprosa i soglasit'sia na ego obsuzhdenie. s etoi tsel'iu iaponiia zaiavila o nerazdelennosti svoei politiki i ekonomiki, chto, v svoiu ochered', oznachalo: dal'neishee razvitie sovetsko-iaponskikh ekonomicheskikh otnoshenii napriamuiu sviazano s problemoi razresheniia <<territorial'nogo voprosa>>. nemalovazhnuiu rol' v razvitii sovetsko-iaponskikh otnoshenii na dannom etape sygrali i trebovaniia sSha k iaponii, kotorye aktivno prodvigali ideiu o sozdanii al'iansa kapitalisticheskikh stran v tseliakh protivodeistviia sssr. Eti trebovaniia zakliuchalis' v sleduiushchem: v ramkakh voenno-politicheskogo soiuza s soedinennymi Shtatami iaponiia dolzhna byla ukrepit' svoiu voennuiu moshch', privedia ee v sootvetstvie s moshch'iu ekonomicheskoi. dlia prodvizheniia idei ob uvelichenii i modernizatsii vooruzhennykh sil iaponskoe pravitel'stvo vvelo v oborot poniatie <<sovetskoi voennoi ugrozy>> [Koshkin, s. 278]. dannyi termin podrazumeval ideino-politicheskuiu osnovu provedeniia vyshenazvannoi politiki bez riska raskola obshchestva na storonnikov i protivnikov novykh izmenenii. drugimi slovami, ukhudshenie otnoshenii s sovetskim soiuzom bylo predstavleno iaponskim pravitel'stvom kak polnoe sootvetstvie natsional'nym interesam strany. sovetskoe rukovodstvo, estestvenno, negativno otneslos' k vyshenazvan- nym izmeneniiam, kotorye pridali dvustoronnemu vzaimodeistviiu kharakter, priamo protivopolozhnyi tendentsiiam 1970-kh gg. sssr vsemi silami staralsia sokhranit' blagopriiatnye i vzaimovygodnye otnosheniia, kotorye byli dostig- nuty v rezul'tate dolgikh i trudnykh sporov i soglashenii. tak, iaponskomu pravitel'stvu byli predlozheny varianty: sovmestnaia razrabotka mer dove- riia, zakliuchenie konventsii o vzaimnom nenapadenii i neprimenenii sily, sozdanie v atr sistemy kollektivnoi bezopasnosti. sovetskaia storona takzhe zaiavila o gotovnosti predostavit' garantii neprimeneniia iadernogo oruzhiia protiv iaponii, v sluchae sokhraneniia poslednei zakreplennykh v konstitutsii <<neiadernykh printsipov>> -- ne priobretat', ne proizvodit' i ne razmeshchat' na svoei territorii iadernoe vooruzhenie. nesmotria na vse popytki sssr priiti k mirnomu i vzaimovygodnomu sosushchestvovaniiu s iaponiei, nachalo 1980-kh gg. kharakterizuetsia kak period okonchatel'nogo podryva sistemy dvustoronnikh otnoshenii mezhdu vyshenaz- vannymi gosudarstvami. v pervuiu ochered', eto sviazano s tem, chto iaponskoe pravitel'stvo izbralo kurs na polnuiu solidarnost' i podderzhku politiki administratsii r. reigana, tsel' kotoroi zakliuchalas' v raskruchivanii novogo vitka v gonke vooruzhenii dlia uvelicheniia ekonomicheskogo davleniia na sovet- skii soiuz. iarkim primerom dannoi podderzhki iavliaetsia odobrenie iaponskim prem'er-ministrom razmeshcheniia amerikanskikh raket v zapadnoi evrope. stoit otmetit', chto dannoe reshenie bylo pervym v poslevoennoi istorii iaponii izvestiia urFu. seriia 2. gumanitarnye nauki. No. 2 (175) M. E. Elkin. razvitie sovetsko-iaponskikh otnoshenii v pervoi polovine 1980-kh gg. priamo napravlennym protiv sssr. Bolee togo, iaponiia aktivno prodvigala ideiu o razmeshchenii amerikanskikh raketnykh kompleksov ne tol'ko v evrope, no i v azii [Hasegawa, p. 179]. so svoei storony sssr, osuzhdaia novuiu politiku iaponii, 4 fevralia 1983 g. vystupil s zaiavleniem, gde otmechalos', chto sosedstvuiushchie s iaponiei gosudarstva ne mogut ne sdelat' sootvetstvuiushchikh vyvodov iz fakta usileniia militaristskikh nastroenii v iaponskoi administratsii i budut vynuzhdeny priniat' sootvetstvuiushchie mery [Koshkin, s. 279]. odnako pravitel'stvo sovetskogo soiuza stremilos' ni v koem sluchae ne dopustit' sokrashcheniia tovarooborota s iaponiei, kotoraia, stoit otmetit', zanimala vtoroe mesto v torgovle sssr so stranami kapitalisticheskogo lageria [tam zhe]. dlia sokhraneniia vzaimovygodnogo sotrudnichestva, naprimer, v 1983 g. v Moskve byla provedena vstrecha s predstaviteliami torgovo-promyshlennoi palaty iaponii vo glave s ee prezidentom s. nagano. odnako nesmotria na oboiud- nuiu zainteresovannost' obeikh storon v prodolzhenii i razvitii vzaimovygod- nogo sotrudnichestva, v silu novoi spetsifiki vnutrennei i vneshnei politiki iaponii, dobit'sia konkretnykh rezul'tatov po stabilizatsii ekonomicheskikh otnoshenii ne udalos'. nachalos' stabil'noe sokrashchenie tovarooborota, chto povleklo za soboi snizhenie pozitsii iaponii v torgovle sovetskogo soiuza s kapitalisticheskimi gosudarstvami so vtorogo do piatogo mesta [Kutakov, s. 177-178]. iz pozitivnykh momentov otnoshenii mezhdu sssr i iaponiei v rassmatri- vaemyi period khotelos' by otmetit' sotrudnichestvo v takoi traditsionnoi sfere kak rybolovstvo. Posle vvedeniia v mire ekonomicheskikh morskikh zon v radiuse 200 mil', peregovory po voprosam rybolovstva v sovetsko-iaponskikh otnosheniiakh ne tol'ko priobreli znachimost', no i stali naibolee stabil'nymi vo vsem komplekse dvustoronnikh otnoshenii. Pomimo togo, chto na mezhpravi- tel'stvennom urovne osoboe mesto zaniali ezhegodnye peregovory o vzaimnom promysle v smezhnykh zonakh [soglashenie...], v period 1980-1984 gg. uvelichilos' sotrudnichestvo mezhdu chastnymi firmami i organizatsiiami [Kutakov, s. 178]. naibolee iarkim primerom voennoi sostavliaiushchei antisovetskogo kursa iaponii stala tak nazyvaemaia <<doktrina nakasone>>. ee sut' zakliuchalas', v pervuiu ochered', v povyshenii roli iaponii v voennoi konfrontatsii stran kapitalisticheskogo bloka s sssr. vo vremia svoei pervoi vstrechi s amerikan- skim prezidentom v 1983 g. iaponskii prem'er-ministr nakasone iasukhiro zaiav- lial ne tol'ko o podderzhke vneshnepoliticheskogo kursa soedinennykh Shtatov v otnoshenii sovetskogo soiuza, no takzhe predlagal i aktivizatsiiu roli iapo- nii v voennom soiuze. tak, naprimer, bylo sdelano predlozhenie o razreshenii amerikantsam minirovat' mezhdunarodnye prolivy: sangarskii, Koreiskii i laperuza, chtoby, po zaiavleniiu prem'er-ministra nakasone, <<po nim ne smogli proiti sovetskie podvodnye lodki i drugie korabli>>. Bolee togo, so storony iaponskogo pravitel'stva dazhe zvuchali zaiavleniia o zhelanii vstupit' v nato [Remarks of the President and Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone...]. izvestiia urFu. seriia 2. gumanitarnye nauki. No. 2 (175) dal'nevostoChnyI veKtor sovetsKoI vneShneI PolitiKi reaktsiia sssr na rastushchuiu vrazhdebnost' so storony sSha i iaponii byla vpolne ozhidaemoi: sovetskoe rukovodstvo stalo aktivno ukrepliat' obo- ronosposobnost' svoikh dal'nevostochnykh granits [Sebata, p. 56]. odnako eti vynuzhdennye mery sovetskogo pravitel'stva byli lish' na ruku iaponskoi administratsii, kotoraia lishnii raz smogla predostavit' obshchestvennosti dokazatel'stva podtverzhdeniia <<sovetskoi ugrozy>>, tem samym podcherkivaia neobkhodimost' provedeniia stol' zhestkoi politiki po otnosheniiu k sssr. nel'zia ne vspomnit' eshche ob odnom intsidente, proizoshedshem v rassma- trivaemyi period, kotoryi okazal ser'eznoe vliianie na ukhudshenie sovetsko- iaponskikh otnoshenii. 1 sentiabria 1983 g., v rezul'tate grubykh narushenii voz- dushnykh granits, nepodaleku ot ostrova sakhalin sovetskim istrebitelem byl sbit passazhirskii avialainer Boeing 747 iuzhnokoreiskoi kompanii Korean Air Lines, sovershavshii perelet po marshrutu n'iu-Iork -- ankoridzh -- seul. na moment intsidenta samolet otklonilsia ot kursa bolee chem na 500 km na zapad, tem samym zaidia v zakrytoe vozdushnoe prostranstvo sssr nad Kamchatkoi i ostrovom sakhalin, gde raspolagalsia riad voennykh ob'ektov. intsident vyzval nemalo sporov v mirovoi obshchestvennosti o vine sovetskogo soiuza, kotoryi zaiavlial, chto vsia situatsiia svidetel'stvovala o tom, chto sbityi samolet sover- shal razvedyvatel'nye deistviia. iaponiia zhe sovmestno s sSha vozlozhila vsiu vinu za proisshestvie na sovetskii soiuz i ego agressivnuiu politiku, vvedia novye sanktsii, vplot' do prekrashcheniia aviasoobshcheniia mezhdu Moskvoi i tokio. v ideologicheskoi kampanii iaponskogo pravitel'stva protiv sssr stali pro- slezhivat'sia ne tol'ko antisovetskie, no i antirusskie idei [Muromov, s. 311]. odnako, nesmotria na ves' negativ sovetsko-iaponskikh otnoshenii, sleduet otmetit', chto v kul'turnoi i obshchestvennykh sferakh sviazi ne tol'ko ne byli zablokirovany, no i poluchili dostatochno zametnoe pozitivnoe razvitie. naprimer, pervaia polovina 1980-kh gg. otmechalas' aktivnoi dvustoronnei deiatel'nost'iu po linii profsoiuzov, gorodov-pobratimov i obshchestv druzhby. na ostrove khokkaido deistvovalo dvizhenie za sozdanie domov sovetsko-iapon- skoi druzhby, i takzhe ukreplialis' sviazi etogo ostrova s sakhalinom. neznachi- tel'no, no tem ne menee uvelichivalsia turisticheskii obmen [Koshkin, s. 282]. vse vyshenazvannoe v toi ili inoi mere sposobstvovalo nekotoromu snizheniiu nedoveriia i nastorozhennosti obshchestvennosti sssr i iaponii drug k drugu na fone eskalatsii politicheskogo protivostoianiia. takim obrazom, period 1980-kh gg. kharakterizuetsia kak samyi protivorechi- vyi etap v sovetsko-iaponskikh otnosheniiakh. v dannoe vremia kharakter otnoshenii oboikh gosudarstv rezko smenil svoi vektor s napravlennogo na druzhbu i sotrud- nichestvo k vzaimnomu nedoveriiu i vrazhde. i nesmotria na postoiannye prizyvy sovetskoi storony k nalazhivaniiu dobrososedskikh otnoshenii s iaponiei vo vsekh sferakh gosudarstvennoi deiatel'nosti, k kontsu pervoi poloviny 1980-kh gg. sovetsko-iaponskie otnosheniia dostigli samogo nizkogo urovnia svoego razvi- tiia za poslevoennyi period. iaponskoe pravitel'stvo, v svoiu ochered', s pri- niatiem kontseptsii <<kompleksnogo obespecheniia natsional'noi bezopasnosti>> izvestiia urFu. No. 2 (175) M. E. Elkin. razvitie sovetsko-iaponskikh otnoshenii v pervoi polovine 1980-kh gg. prodolzhalo sledovat' soglasovannomu s sSha kursu, v kotorom ne bylo mesta liubym kompromissam s sssr. Istochniki soglashenie mezhdu Pravitel'stvom soiuza sovetskikh sotsialisticheskikh respublik i Pravitel'stvom iaponii o vzaimnykh otnosheniiakh v oblasti rybolovstva u poberezhii obeikh stran (7 dekabria 1984 goda) [Elektronnyi resurs] // Elektronnyi Fond pravovoi i norma- tivno-tekhnicheskoi dokumentatsii <<Kodeks>>. URL: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/902096592 (data obrashcheniia: 12.06.2017). Remarks of the President and Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone of Japan Following Their Meetings in Tokyo [Electronic resource] // A Documentary History of U.S.-Japanese Relations, 1945-1997, Database of Japanese Politics and International Relations, Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo. 1983. P. 1040-1044. URL: http://worldjpn.grips.ac.jp/ documents/texts/ JPUS/19831110.O1E.html (accessed: 12.06.2017). Ling Mu Shan Xing Zong Li Da Chen toronarudo*re-ganMi Da Tong Ling tonoGong Tong Sheng Ming . Wai Jiao Qing Shu 26Hao , 1985 Nian , 465- 468Ye . (Suzuki Zenko soridaijin to Ronarudo Regan bei daitoryo to no kyodo seimei. Gaiko seisho 26 go, 1985 nen, 465-468 peiji) [Electronic resource]. URL: http://worldjpn.grips.ac.jp/documents/ texts/JPUS/19810508.D1J.html (accessed: 12.06.2017). Issledovaniia Aliev R. Sh.-A. vneshniaia politika iaponii v 70-kh -- nachale 80-kh godov (teoriia i praktika). M. : gl. red. vost. lit., 1986. Koshkin A. A. rossiia i iaponiia: uzly protivorechii. M. : veche, 2010. Kutakov L. N. Moskva -- tokio: ocherki diplomaticheskikh otnoshenii, 1956-1986. M. : Mezhdunar. otnosheniia, 1988. Muromov A. I. Koreiskii <<Boing-747>> sbit nad sakhalinom // 100 velikikh aviakatastrof / gl. red. s. dmitriev. M. : veche, 2003. s. 300-313. Petrov D. V. vneshniaia politika iaponii na rubezhe 70--80-kh godov // iaponiia 1980. ezhe- godnik. M. : gl. red. vost. lit. izd-va <<nauka>>, 1981. s. 49-76. Hasegawa T. The Northern Territories Dispute and Russo-Japanese Relations. Vol. 2 : Neither War Nor Peace, 1985-1998. Berkeley : International and Area Studies Publications, University of California at Berkeley, 1998. Period of President Tanaka's Leadership [Electronic resource] // Website of Japan Liberal Democratic Party. URL: https://www.jimin.jp/english/about-ldp/history/104281.html (accessed: 12.06.2017). Sebata T. Japan's Defense Policy and Bureaucratic Politics, 1976-2007. Lanham, Md. : Univ. Press of America, 2010.
Cyberattacks on Energy Infrastructures: Modern War Weapons Tawfiq M. Aljohani Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Taibah University (Y-Campus), Saudi Arabia 42353 torwi@taibahu.edu.sa in the cyberattacks on Abstract- Recent high-profile energy infrastructures, such as the security breach of the Colonial Pipeline in 2021 and attacks that have disrupted Ukraine's power grid from the mid-2010s till date, have pushed cybersecurity as a top priority. As political tensions have escalated in Europe this year, concerns about critical infrastructure security have increased. Operators industrial sector face new cybersecurity threats that increase the risk of disruptions in services, property damages, and environmental harm. Amid rising geopolitical tensions, industrial companies, with their network-connected systems, are now considered major targets for adversaries to advance political, social, or military agendas. Moreover, the recent Russian-Ukrainian conflict has set the alarm worldwide about the danger of targeting energy grids via cyberattacks. Attack methodologies, techniques, and procedures used successfully to hack energy grids in Ukraine can be used elsewhere. This work aims to present a thorough analysis of the cybersecurity of the energy infrastructure amid the increased rise of cyberwars. The article navigates through the recent history of energy-related cyberattacks and their reasoning, discusses the grid's vulnerability, and makes a precautionary argument for securing the grids against them. Index Terms-- Cybersecurity of Critical Infrastructure, Russia- Ukraine war, Smart grid hacking, cybersecurity of power grids, power system digitalization, energy cyberwar. 1. Introduction For years, experts have expressed growing concerns that critical infrastructures are vulnerable to cyberattacks almost anywhere in the world. Remotely transmitted malware and viruses can compromise interconnected power systems, airports, hospitals, military systems, and anywhere internet- connected computers are used to manage critical functions. As the world heads toward more digitalization, integrating new communication technologies offers unlimited possibilities for the proper accumulation of information, creating a fundamental dependence on proper functioning in all areas of society. As such reliance could offer a great opportunity for a smart and efficient world, it also poses significant threats to the operation of critical infrastructures and vital facilities. Specifically, safety issues from illegal acts that violate the integrity, availability, and confidentiality of information in cyberspace that could damage information resources and communication systems are expected to be the central theme in the digitalized world. Exploitation of cyberspace to advance specific political, social, and military agendas is of particular concern. In recent years, data and information resources from industrial control systems (ICS) in energy utilities, financial institutions, government agencies and official servers have become the main target of frequent cyberattacks. The sharp that politically motivated rise cybercriminal groups, primarily acting on behalf of state governments, have carried out proliferating and infringing in cyberattacks shows attacks on public and private entities, resulting in severe repetitional losses. For example, Russia, known for its advanced cyber-capabilities, is seen as the main villain in cyberspace due to accusations of cyberattacks against its adversaries to promote political and military objectives. On April 20, 2022, cybersecurity authorities from the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom issued a joint advisory, warning organizations that Russia's invasion of Ukraine could evoke malicious cyber threats worldwide [1]. The adversary activities are due in response to the unprecedented economic sanctions imposed on Russia and military assistance provided by the U.S. and its allies to Ukraine to help it withstand the Russian invasion. involves electrifying transportation Energy cybersecurity has become under the spotlight with the unfolding of Ukraine's war crisis, even though concerns about it have been evident long before the crisis itself. The swift penetration of renewables and the digitalization of energy networks have further increased the vulnerability of the energy systems. A future that depends on low-carbon and technologies industrial processes. Sectors of the economy that were initially fueled by fossil fuels are currently being connected to energy systems that are under digital control, making them easily accessible to hackers. Additionally, a future with net-zero carbon emission further implies that a more decentralized generation system will be in use. In contrast to using a few high-capacity coal- or gas-fired power stations to supply energy, a series of dispersed solar panels and wind turbines will be adopted. These facilities significantly increase the surface area of the energy system exposed to attacks with the inclusion of the extensive communication technologies that couple the power cables, substations, and storage units to achieve swift and smart control. that target critical The nature of broad-scale cyber and electronic warfare attacks is yet to be fully understood. The continued Russian- Ukrainian conflict is an example of the rise of cyber threats infrastructures, and cyber activists especially energy systems. Russia acutely disrupted the power grid of Ukraine in 2015, 2016, and with the subsequent unleashing of the destructive NotPetya malware attack in 2017 which had global effects and resulted in billions of dollars worth of damage. Ever since its first invasion of Ukraine in 2014, Russia has exploited the former Soviet Union state like a playground to test its emerging cyber weapons. A comprehension of Ukraine's grid structure and technological potential is possible with its historical Soviet infrastructure that could have played a role in the successful implementation of hundreds of cyberattacks that, with its major share targeting the energy infrastructure, aimed to collect intelligence on the Ukrainian forces and critical bases. Consequently, the use of aggressive cyber and electronic warfare in the pre-and first phases of the 2022 war could have played a major role in Russia's decision to invade Ukraine, the defacements of possibly giving them advantages on the ground. According to an MIT technology review report [2], massive cyberattack campaigns were carried out on the Ukrainian energy utilities during the first hours of the recent military invasion. Although effect of such attcaks on the military operations were not yet assessed, it was announced that the cyberattacks aimed to delete data from the assailed utility control rooms. Before the invasion, the Ukrainian websites, destructive malware, and distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks were believed to have been caused by Russia and its delegations. The Ukrainian cyber response teams identified and halted Russian military hackers attempting to penetrate power substations in Ukraine which could have resulted in 2 million people losing power [3]. On the other hand, the "IT Army," a volunteer group consisting of various hacktivists, has been employed with the responsibility to initiate DDoS attacks on the Russian and Belarusian governments, including their energy and banking systems, as well as the task to identify and report Russian disinformation campaigns. For instance, the Belarusian Cyber Partisans have paid more attention to inflicting mayhem on the Belarusian train system to keep the transition of Russian troops and equipment in slow motion [4]. The additional announcement came from the decentralized hacking group 'Anonymous' that they are officially involved in a cyberwar against the Russian government. Its main targets are state-run power grids, radio and television, and communication networks. This has also ignited calls from the other side, where criminal groups in allegiance to Russia have publicly declared their support for the recent war and promised retaliative actions against the infrastructures of nations who might attack Russia [5]. It is worth mentioning that Ukrainian authorities, by August 2022, have documented over 300 ferocious cyberattacks that hit vital points around the country per the CyberPeace Institute. The major contribution of this work is to provide a discussion on the cybersecurity of the energy infrastructure. Specifically, the paper discusses the logic behind targeting power grids in recent years with different types of malware; provides an insight into the types and techniques used in cyberattacks and whether the power grids are vulnerable to initiating such attacks; discusses cyberattacks as standardization counterefforts; and finally concludes with remarks on the resiliency of the grids to achieve improved security. the motives behind efforts made and 2. From Airstrikes to Cyberattacks: Why Targeting the Energy Infrastructure During Conflicts? 2.1 Attacking power grid during wars. The energy infrastructure is the backbone of any society and is especially important as it facilitates the operations of other critical infrastructure sectors. There is a pearl of conventional wisdom about targeting power networks that diversity of institutions can be broadly affected by such attacks, from political, social, and military aspects. Particularly, two main political consequences are the outcome of electricity losses. First, there will be a weakening of civilian morale and, therefore, forcibly alter the behavior of the assailed governments. Secondly, these attacks can aggravate the expenses being made by a country's political leaders, compelling them to adjust their policies. Besides, two main critical military consequences are frequently pointed out: the loss of power will directly affect the resisting forces and likely reduce the assailed country's capability of sufficient war equipment production. Whether separately or in combination, these four arguments were employed long years ago to support launching attacks on the enemy's electric systems. The discussion on such impacts is illustrated in section 3 of this work. It is believed that the fastest and most effective way to initiate a direct attack on the will of a nation is "to cripple its economic structure and intimidate its very existence" through precision attacks [6]. Due to many possible strategic targets within an economic structure, it is difficult to hit every target, even with a massive air force. However, experts at the Air Corps Tactical School (ACTS) highlight that a developed nation relies heavily on its energy grid to support various vital points, making it the best strategic target for any attack. Moreover, the experts in ACTS believe that victory in any war heavily relies on the civilian population's will to remain persistent in fighting; hence, their target analysis highlighted civilian rather than military impacts [7]. This highlights choosing power networks as strategic targets during conflicts. Certainly, the outcomes of these attacks would not only impact war production but also influence the will of civilians. The morale of the civilian population could be affected by attacks on power grids to the extent that it likely will induce modifications in government policy. The breaking up of the economic structure through the destruction of power grids could be an efficient way to execute such a strategy. These theories about strategic attacks created at the ACTS became practical concepts that greatly inspired the targets during wars such as Vietnam and Iraq's first and second wars. In addition to being a strategically important target, attacks on energy infrastructures using newly developed and possibly untraceable techniques, like cyberattacks, have become widely popular in recent years. Asymmetric warfare is a technique used in wars for hundreds of years. Whenever there is an unequal fight between contenders, the weakest fighters would use any new, untraditional, less-costly methods to harm the strongest fighter. Modern forms of asymmetric warfare involve the use of computers. According to Clark and Knack, electronic warfare is the intrusion of foreign computers or networks to disable them in order to neutralize and disrupt essential services [8]. Hence, exploiting the internet and network systems provides weak countries a golden opportunity to fight traditionally stronger enemies through doing more extensive espionage. The U.S. is the most powerful country in terms of conventional military power. It spends far more on defense than any other country, such as China or Russia, which are the biggest threat to the U.S. in terms of geopolitical and conventional military power. China and Russia have developed significant offensive cyber capabilities to complement deficiencies in their military, and see the use of the U.S. power grid as a strategic target during wartime [9]. Historically, the two countries have used cyberspace for espionage. While China is paying more attention to stealing U.S. research to advance its project programs and identify U.S. military strategies and weaknesses that could be exploited in wartime, Russia poses a more direct threat to the U.S. energy grid and critical infrastructure sectors. Russia is increasingly focusing on devising offensive cyber capabilities, is evidenced by attacks on the French TV5-Monde and the Ukrainian energy system. Furthermore, these attacks have demonstrated cyber capabilities to disrupt physical infrastructure [10]. The TV5-Monde attack used specialized malware to target and destroy the encoding system to broadcast the French TV network. On the other hand, the including cyber weapons. This cyberattack on Ukraine's power system used a variant of the BlackEnergy malware and a modified kill-disk function. The disk-remove function erased the master boot records (MBR), rendering the component obsolete. Disabling the MBR disconnected 30 substation breakers using the human- machine interface (HMI) [10, 11]. The interest of Russia in meddling with the U.S. energy infrastructure is not a secret and has been brought to light recently. A report from David Sanger, a New York Times journalist with a cybersecurity background, reveals that 'According to the United States intelligence officials and technology company executives, Russian hackers whom the State sponsors seem to focus more on indicating that their technology can disrupt the American electric utility grid compared to the events surrounding the November 2018 elections.' The same article also highlights Sanger's report that the Russian military intelligence agency had penetrated the control rooms of power plants across the United States according to Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and that there are fears that there are parts of the grid could be hijacked by remote control. The DHS well understands the scope of the threat, says Sanger. However, he also unveils that great fear regarding the fact that plans, by the Russians, may be underway to disconnect American power systems in moments of conflict and which induce a military response. According to U.S. federal officials, Russian hackers reported in 2017 that hundreds of victims were claimed during a vast and persistent cyberattacks campaign that gave them access to the inner chambers of the control rooms of U.S. electric utilities that led to widespread blackouts. The DHS Chief of Industrial Control System Analysis, Jonathan Homer, revealed that there were cases of cyberattacks in the spring of 2016 into 2017 and that such attacks took advantage of connections between utilities and vendors who had unique access to how software could be updated, how diagnostics on equipment were run and how specific services were performed to ensure millions of pieces of gear were kept in working order [12]. Indeed, a successful cyberattack on the power grid could be devastating to economies and human lives. On August 14, 2003, eight states in the U.S. and Canada experienced a major blackout. The outage has nothing to do with cybersecurity, but it could provide insight into the impact of a successful attack on the U.S. grid. About 50 million people lost energy for two days; the blackout also killed 11 people and cost the U.S. economy about $ 6 billion [13]. 2.2 Vulnerability of Power Grids Against Cyberattacks: Is The Power Grid Hackable? Power grids are vulnerable to cyberattacks. Before automation took place in recent years, SCADA systems were not initially connected to the internet and hence did not receive significant threats from external attacks, as most concerns were from inside threats (e.g., misoperation). Connecting SCADA to the internet presents security concerns due to weak open network protocols such as TCP/IP that are more cost-effective than other proprietary methods. As more SCADA systems are deployed, open network protocols allow businesses to connect SCADA systems, which pave the way to both a more digitalized and intelligent energy infrastructure and a more vulnerable and jeopardized one. Additionally, the use of weak communication protocols such as Modbus and DNP3 creates more security concerns. Modbus and DNP3 lack proper authentication and encryption, allowing anyone to view transmitted data over the network in plain text. Data transmitted via Modbus or DNP3 can also be intercepted, manipulated, or altered [9]. Hackers view vulnerabilities in ICS infrastructure as the holy grail of cyber warfare [14]. An attacker can compromise ICS and place it outside its normal operating range. Stuxnet, for example, increased the speed of centrifuges at Natanz, a uranium enrichment plant in Iran. The standard operating range of the centrifuge at Natanz was 63,000 revolutions per minute (RPM). The malware raised the speed to 84,600 rpm and lowered it to 120 rpm, disrupting the centrifuge by changing its rotational speed [15]. Companies can control internet-connected SCADA systems hundreds of miles away, where employees do not have to be physically present at the stations. As more SCADA systems are integrated, the need for connectivity increases. Thousands of new devices such as sensors, controllers, relays, and meters added to the smart grid pose security concerns for a variety of reasons. The more devices connected to the smart grid, the more it gives attackers a broader attack surface. While vendors of these technologies have standardized them to provide better interoperability, they unintentionally created security holes. In some cases, vendors install backdoors on devices to apply patches or software updates. Other vendors void device warranties if factory settings are changed, such as changing factory passwords or installing software that provides greater security [9]. While remote access has increased the vulnerability of SCADA systems, remote access is essential to managing the distributed assets inherent in the power system. Strong passwords, authentication, and encryption are often overlooked when implementing remote access tools. Authentication verifies a user's identity, typically using a username and password. On the other hand, encryption makes data unreadable for anyone other than authorized users. The lack of strong passwords, authentication, and encryption is more likely to compromise the utility's control system network. Tools like SHODAN allow a person to search for internet-accessible control systems, routers, and other internet-accessible devices. Hence, fears arise that hackers can use similar tools to search for various internet-connected equipment and to identify devices by their IP addresses [16]. Vulnerabilities in SCADA and other ICS systems continue to grow every year primarily due to the fact that ICS components have become increasingly accessible over the internet. According to Kaspersky Lab researchers, the number of vulnerabilities discovered in ICS components in power utilities has increased from 19 in 2010 to 189 in 2015 [17]. The US Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) announced that this number reached 600 security disclosures in the first half of 2022. Security experts argue that most of these vulnerabilities are yet to be resolved, with a significant share of them remaining unpatched, meaning that they have not yet received an update to address them. Fig. 1 presents an illustration of conducting cyberattacks on an energy control center. 2.3 History of cyberattacks on energy infrastructures The most infamous cyberattack on energy systems happened in 2015 when hackers cut off power to almost a quarter-million people in Ukraine for nearly six hours. The attack, credited to Russia-backed hackers, was successful due to the lack of proper isolation between the Operational Technology (OT) and Information Technology (IT) systems. Hackers disrupted the I.T. systems through successful phishing email attacks that granted them free movement throughout the network to assault the utility's energy management system. The attackers implemented firmware that affected the ability of the grid operators to communicate with substations while also influencing the operation of the station's appartus. The following year, another cyberattack was successfully launched through a substation north of Kyiv, knocking out every circuit breaker in the system and briefly shutting down power in large parts of the city. According to Andy Bochman, a senior cybersecurity strategist at the Idaho National Laboratory, the goal behind these attacks were not only to punish the Ukrainians but also to show what Russia can do to other adversaries. Another attack, called the Notpetya, took place in 2017 and was successfully executed by a Russian military intelligence group resulting in the infection of 10% of all Ukrainian computer systems with a malware package which ended up spreading globally. Estimated losses in banking, military and energy industries are nearly $10 billion due to the attack which was considered one of the most severe cyberattacks in history. The authors of [18] suggest that the U.S. power grid could be hacked with the same techniques used to hack the Ukrainian grid. To a great extent, grid impacts from cybersecurity threats have been noticed in recent years in the U.S. and worldwide. A 2018 attack disrupted communications on the Midcontinent Independent System Operator (MISO) grid without significantly impacting customers. With the advent of the outages due to such attacks in Ukraine, experts believe the U.S. grid is impermeable to how hackers can launch cyberattacks, triggering calls to address the issue. In 2007, it was demonstrated by the Idaho National Laboratory that a cyberattack could physically crush a generator by placing it in an out-of-phase mode, resulting in an extreme torque and breakdown of the machine. Similarly, the North American Electric Reliability Corp. (NERC) also revealed that a quarter of the electric utilities it control were exposed to the vulnerability of the 2019 SolarWinds attack, which is characterized by the insertion of advanced malware into the software supply chain [19]. Experts say that it could take several years for the electric sectors to estimate the full impact of that attack. Similarly, while there was no impact on the grid resulting from the attack on Colonial Pipeline, a transport pathway for refined oil products in Southern U.S. States, the attack serves as an example of undesired consequences. The attack on Colonial's I.T. system prompted a defensive shutdown by the company, leading to hefty costs. Similarly, SolarWinds exemplifies the threat to supply chains, where a single platform was compromised and afterward infected thousands of users. The Colonial shutdown reveals that hackers do not essentially need to target control systems to instigate societal impacts. Anthony Pugliese, a high-ranking official at the U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), stated that there was an increase in the number of oppositional countries that paid attention to pipelines as areas of enormous opportunity. Such a statement becomes evident as a wave of cyberattacks aimed to target the communication systems of five U.S. pipeline firms since 2018. Fig.2 provides a timline of the most notable cyberattacks that targeted energy infrastructures in recent years. 3. Reasoning Behaind Attacking the Power Grids in Modern Times Experts at ACTS suggest that to successfully conduct tactical attacks against energy networks, the economic structure of a country needs to be well-understood. Information is required to initiate successful attacks on energy systems, such as level of consumption, backup systems, and the predictable impacts of eliminating electricity. As a result, collection of such data justifies performing another set of cyberattacks on other entities with a mission to collect sufficient intelligence. An understanding of the tactics behind the attacks could be more consequential than deciding on the grid's vulnerability. This is because the timing for effective attacks on such facilities greatly depends on the strategies to be used. As mentioned in section 2, four basic techniques have been long applied, either discretely or in combination, to justify adversarial attacks on electric power, whether this attack is performed by airstrikes or cyberattacks. 3.1 Attacks to target citizens' morale The assumption that cutting off the energy supply to civilians will induce a modification in a nation's policy has been one of the most persistent beliefs in tactical wars, as seen in ACTS strategic targeting policy [7]. In the same manner, Fig.1 Illustration of possible outcomes of hacking utility control systems Fig.2. Timeline for the major cyberattacks against energy infrastructures in recent years intermittent elimination of electricity via cyberattacks may produce a decline in civilian morale and, if successfully implemented, could force government policies to change their intended goals. One of the strategies employed in the recent Russian-Ukrainian conflict seems to aim to influence the citizens' morale. During the first hours of the military operations, major cyberattacks hit energy substations across the eastern frontier of Ukraine. While some aimed to delete control rooms data, vital for proper grid operation, other targeted circuit breakers and heat and power stations located at Sumy, leading to outages and wide services disconnection on citizens in the cold month of February [20]. Additionally, there is another way of indirectly influencing the citizens' morale via disabling critical pipelines or gas processing facilities to cause a considerable fuel supply disruption. The fuel disruption will likely lead to a significant increase in fuel prices, which becomes a tool to influence the leaders by igniting inconvenience and anger among the citizens. While such a scenario occurred with the Colonial pipeline cyberattack in 2021, the direct effect on the comfort of citizens and surcharges in energy prices are still underexplored. 3.2 Attacks to influence leaders' and policies Attacking a vital infrastructure like the energy systems has been one of the strategic moves to manipulate political leaders' decisions. Whether attacks aimed to cut power on civilians or destroy expensive equipment at the energy grids, such attacks escalate costs on leadership which could drive a policy change. However, such strategy may not be completely effective due to numerous reasons. First, a potential cause is the sense of nationalism and the high hopes most nations possess during a conflict, which likely despises the typical cost estimates versus benefits that should apply to external nations not involved in the battles. The damage wreaked on electric power will possibly not go beyond the costs that the leaders of a country desire to pay if the problem in question is of great national interest. Secondly, immediately after national leaders commit themselves to a course of action, they become unwilling to bend their minds. Such a change of decisions could imply that they would lose their reputation and political power. Instead of conceding to some defeat in domestic politics, they prefer to proceed with their current plan of action. In a more practical sense, political leaders are left out of the consequences of losing the national power system. While there are yet to have studies that could assess the impact of cyberattacks on political leaders' decisions, an official USAF bombing survey that aimed to evaluate the effect of taking out energy service via airstrikes concluded that any attack campaigns launched at a country's electrical grid are unlikely to alter political authorities positions [7]. 3.3 Attacks to gain military advances Targeting energy networks to alter a nation's military forces appears to be prevalent in recent conflicts. This is mainly a manifestation of how seriously reliant the military is on electricity to execute activities like powering air defense radars and communication systems compared to the past. During the first weeks of the 2022 invasion, Russia surrounded and successfully conquered the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant that provides the energy to most of the Eastern part of Ukraine, apparently where most of the Russian military operations are conducted. Although cyberattacks on power plants could serve as a strategic measure to generate brief confusion, as happened during the first hours of the Russian invasion of Ukraine when widespread cyberattacks targeted control centers in Eastern Ukraine, their impact could be of minimal long-term consequences. This is attributed to the fact that the military, as a priority user, will gain access to any available power in the national grid and have full authority to possess emergency power systems [21]. Doubtless, confusion was induced in the Iraqi military due to the airstrikes on the Iraqi power system in 1991 and 2003. Yet, its impact in advancing the objective of tactically crippling the Iraqi leadership is neither well-understood nor discussed. After an investigation into the bomb wrecks in Iraq aftermath of the 1991 war, William C. Arkin of Greenpeace International believed that the tactical bombing had almost no difference in the outcome [6]. Moreover, the target selection plan during the Gulf Wars has been questioned due to the attack on the power grid and the implicit collateral wreckage it caused. Experts at The Gulf Conflict and the New World Order, Lawrence Freedman and Efraim Karsh reveal that "The areas of USAF campaign directly aimed at the economic and political structure of the Iraqi system appear to have had little relevance to the final victory." However, this may not be the case for cyberattacks since airstrikes campaigns are associated with significant human, economic and military costs. On the contrary, cyberattacks could be discretely performed hundreds of miles away and at high precision to achieve the overall goals at significantly lower costs than air campaigns. This may justify using cyberattacks as a strategic tool to mangle a nation's energy infrastructure during conflicts since potential military gains could be achieved with minimal physical efforts. Among the cyberattacks that hit numerous energy control centers during this war, the Ukrainian government announced in April that they successfully foiled a Russian malware aimed at a regional power utility. The malware, similar to the one that took down most of Kyiv's power grid in 2015, was said to be successfully planted in February. The Ukrainian officials believe that Russia waited until April to perform the attack as a part of its military advancing strategy [20]. Another facet of using cyberattacks to achieve military gains is data collection to build sufficient intelligence about a country. During the months that preceded the recent Russian invasion, hundreds of cyberattacks targeted different critical facilities in Ukraine, aimed primarily at collecting intelligence. Among the targeted infrastructure, energy centers had a significant share, where malware believed to be built and executed by Russian-backed cybergroups flooded Ukrainian and other European energy control centers. The collected information may have played a role in the decision to invade Ukraine, as the concentration of energy generation and consumption levels provide hints about the vital military, economic and industrial facilities of the assailed country. In addition, undermining the energy grid could indirectly advance other military objectives. One of the military tactics that hackers could serve is to intentionally create disputes between nations on the assumption that one has cyberattacked the other. Such a scenario could be achieved by initiating cyberattacks with attributions that fell on other countries. For example, Russia is suspected of being behind attacks on TV5- Monde; however, attribution and verification issues were disputed. Russia appears to have carried out a false flag operation during the TV-5Monde cyberattack to trick investigators that a cyberterrorist was behind the attack. APT28, a Russian cybercriminal group, hacked TV5-Monde's Facebook account and posted pro-ISIS propaganda and threats to forces involved in operations against ISIS. Such tactics could be effective for countries interested in attacking the U.S. power grid without declaring full responsibility for it. A country can use known Russian servers, methods, tactics, and procedures to give the impression that Russia carried out the cyberattack. Hence, retaliation by the targeted countries after a cyberattack could be very low due to attribution. Attribution provides the government with the possibility of plausible denial, as the assailed country must prove that the attacking country sponsored the cyber espionage. As evidenced by the fact that Russia added cyber operations to its wartime doctrine, Russia uses cyber operations to enhance its military operations. The 2008 attack on Georgia is a testament to the state's use of cyberattacks to support conventional military attacks. Russian hacktivists organized large-scale DDoS attacks against Georgian media and government websites to indicate Russia's powerfulness and capabilities against its adversaries. 3.4 Attacks on war equipment production The stoppage of (or delay in) war production has been the most powerful argument for attacking energy systems. War goods-making industries rely heavily on electricity, and many processes are impossible without this resource. The bulk of electricity generated in most countries is utilized in the manufacturing process. A conclusion was reached in [7] following World War II that attacks on energy systems can be central in achieving a long-term win in a war against a country lacking the ability to import. Similarly, in short-term war, where the enemy has amassed war items, halting war production could also result in a sufficient impact on winning the war. Consequently, sponsoring cyberattacks on electrical grids to impact war production or even collect data on military objectives could strategically be a highly efficient move. It is worth mentioning that there have yet to be sufficient reports to assess the impact of cyberattacks on Ukraine, enumerated to be over 300 attacks until August 2022, on its war production or manufacturing capabilities. 4. Gaps, Standardization and Mitigation Efforts 4.1 Gaps in securing energy grids cyberly The smart grid is a cyber-physical system comprising different layers representing the attack surface, including physical, sensor/actuator, network, control, and information. With increased internet connectivity, highly confidential personal details are readily accessible. More expansive attack surfaces are created for various kinds of cyberattacks on the grid due to their connection to the internet. DDoS, False Data Injection Attacks (FDIA), and the use of malware are well- known tools against the grid. While hardware failures or software crashes are common problems in the operation of the grid, they are categorized as general system failures with no external causes. Similarly, misoperation caused by external services is usually defined as third-party failures (e.g., internet service providers). Regarding the cybersecurity of the grid, the external or third-party failures are irrelevant. What is important is the security loopholes that hackers see as gates to intrude the grid. These loopholes could be weak points like domestic appliances that could be hacked, especially if defensive mechanisms do not have a solid foundation from the consumer perspective and I.T. systems are not properly segmented. This could provide an access point to the broader energy system. Another loophole is electric vehicles (EVs), which are expected to be millions on roads in the coming few years. A directed attack on EVs and charging stations could trigger substantial disruption to the local power supply. In addition, high-wattage internet-of-things devices such as air conditioners and heaters could be utilized to begin large-scale organized attacks on the grid, resulting in local power outages. The cybersecurity deficiencies within the power grid, which primarily originate from the development of the O.T. and I.T. systems, were reviewed in [22]. Using antiquated cyber defenses by operators of critical infrastructures may further increase the vulnerabilities of the power grid and make it less complicated for hackers to launch attacks. While the National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP) is created for critical infrastructure operators to adopt; however, it is quite challenging to implement some of them. The authors of [23] utilized a grounded theory approach to underline the insufficiency of cybersecurity strategies used by the U.S. government against increasing cyber threats, highlighting gaps in national policy. The relatively high dependence of critical infrastructure on ICS and SCADA systems will lead to massive cyberattacks not only on state or private operators but also on the end-users. As a result, preventive mechanisms must be integrated sufficiently to ensure the safety and security of critical infrastructures like the energy system and its connected users. Such mechanisms include removal of network vulnerability as well as the access to the internet of all ICS; exclusion of ICS networks and devices from the enterprise network; establishment of firewalls for ICS networks and devices; identification of devices that have remote access, and the integration of a secure virtual private network (VPN) to gain access to component(s); a removal or modification of default system accounts and passwords, implementation of a solid password policy; identification and recognition of vulnerabilities; supervision of the administrator accounts created by third-party vendors, and regular performance of audits that recognize cybersecurity risk and impact. 4.2 Standardization The purpose of standardization in cybersecurity is to improve the security of I.T., O.T., ICS systems, networks, and critical infrastructure. According to NIST, cybersecurity standards define functional and safety requirements within a product, design, process, or technology environment. Well- developed cybersecurity standards enable consistency among product developers and serve as a reliable guide for purchasing security products. The standards cover a wide range of granularities, from mathematical definitions of cryptographic algorithms to specifications of web browser security features, and are typically implementation-agnostic. In reality, the standards must address user needs and be limitations must be practical, as cost and technical to meet incorporated when manufacturing products standardization goals. In the U.S,, for example, the major cybersecurity collaboration between the energy industry, the Department of Energy (DOE), and the DOE Office of electricity delivery and energy reliability (DOE-OE) is through the Cybersecurity Risk Information-Sharing Program (CRISP). Through CRISP, quality information regarding cybersecurity can be regularly exchanged among various actors within a defined structure. Also, industrial operators have played a key role in identifying cyber threats and accumulating protection standards through a partnership with the U.S. Federal government, namely the Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs). A specialized ISAC also exists for the electricity sector (E-ISAC), whose primary function is to act as the middle link between the DOE and utilities to coordinate and exchange vital information. Table 1 shows the most recent standardization efforts, both in the U.S. and Europe, to improve the cybersecurity practices related to the energy industry. 4.3 Suggested mitigation efforts 4.3.1 Improving the resiliency of the energy infrastructure The power grid still faces many threats from cyberspace. Smart grid vulnerabilities will always be there as the number of proactive hackers with sufficient tools is expected to explode in the coming years, along with new ways to espionage their targets. However, the chances of exploitation can be reduced by implementing cyber resiliency. One way to improve cyber resilience is to optimally design and implement security mechanisms in devices integrated into the smart grid. Many electronic devices are designed and incorporated without implementing clear security measures, which will always present significant security concerns for potential hacking. Therefore, the network must increase its resilience to cyberattacks. The idea of cyber resilience is to make the system more difficult to access and consequently unattractive to threat actors because it would be too costly and time- consuming to exploit. In-depth defenses is the cornerstone of cyber resilience as it provides several layers of protection to prevent a successful cyberattack. Additionally, redundancy is essential to ensure that in case of the failure of a security measure, others are activated to maintain the network's security. A solid resilience plan can be created by combining techniques presented in fig. 3 to offer uncompromising protection against potential cyberattacks. 4.3.2 Acceleration of proper cyber-breach notification system Hackers often have an advantage over grid operators who do not report cyber incidents promptly, which severely impact proper mitigation efforts. Timely cyber-breach notices activate the obligatory disclosure of information among appropriate parties, including the nature and scope of cyber espionage, leading to better handling of the situation. Such procedure should be accelerated by the government and private sectors as quickly as possible, knowing that it takes time to pass laws while the cyber threat scope continues to grow and become an increasing emergency. 4.3.3 Accelerate the application of commercial and open- source intelligence (OSINT). OSINT refers to the method of obtaining information from public sources. Most intelligence professionals extend this definition to include information intended for public use that public anyone searches, internet over find can announcements, mass or social media,...etc. The use of OSINT does not mandate its advocates to hack into systems or use confidential credentials to access data. In ethical hacking, OSINT could be an effective tool to uncover the digital footprints of cyberattacks on the energy infrastructure, eventually leading to a better understanding of the performed espionage. Nonetheless, a drawback could emerge as using sensitive public information may allow malicious hackers to use it as assets to launch future cyberattacks creatively. Therefore, tradecraft regulations that elucidate the application of OSINT in analytic products need to be well established and maintained. Fig.3. suggested actios for a resilient energy grids against cyberattacks 4.3.4 Mandate proper interagency parternship to optimally identify actions, capabilities, and threats. The primary benefit of enabling a proactive, periodic interagency collaboration within the energy industry lies in safeguarding the confidentiality of energy-related private and public data; the availability and integrity of energy-related technologies; and strengthening the cybersecurity of involved stakeholders. Small to medium energy service providers, which usually form a significant part of the whole energy systems, frequently lack the sufficient resources to invest in complete cybersecurity protections. In contrast, large energy providers and grid operators are expected to operate under strict federal- or state-mandated regulations to protect their infrastructure. Therefore, it is necessary to cautiously examine grid vulnerabilities and develop strategies to tackle such inadequacies that may emerge due to the absence of interagency partnership. At least, local commissions should place demands on smaller utilities to actively incorporate security protection measures similar to those implemented by large utilities. 4.3.5 Encourage public and private sector parternship to upgrade cyber training, research and development. Criticisms have been heaped on major energy utilities for their lack of expenditure on cybersecurity, given that there are rising threats in this regard. It would be a rule of thumb to note that energy utilities should channel enormous resources towards improving cybersecurity to avoid hefty costs if attacked. This is against the reality of the current scene, where reports suggest that energy firms spend only about 0.2% of total revenue on cybersecurity-related measures [24]. It is well-accepted that initiatives like the CISA's Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative and NSA's Cybersecurity Collaboration Center are significant steps toward securing critical infrastructures. There should be a continuation of drills like the just concluded CyberStorm VIII with the inclusion of variety of partners to formulate scenarios for resilience and remediation strategies following massive cyberattacks. Besides, the continuous growth of research and development programs, such as DARPA's Rapid Attack Detection, Isolation, and Characterization Systems program, must be maintained to build tools and technologies that will prompt black start recoveries during a cyberattack on the power grid. An inclusion of the finance and banking sectors can also accelerate collaboration for research support from private sector, considering collobration with the energy service providers. Current achievements have been observed when both the public and private sectors display strong partnerships, as seen in the immediate action taken by Microsoft to upgrade its virus detection systems within three hours of being notified of the malicious malware named FoxBlade that severely hit Ukraine hours before the 2022 invasion [25]. Partnering with the Ukrainian administration, Microsoft aided the rapid dissemination of information to other EU states that could be significantly affected by such an event. Programs planned by investments from public resources should be held to train professionals in cybersecurity. There were great concerns about the unavailability of training for such professionals, which can be linked to the global cybersecurity workforce gap of nearly 2 million workers in 2022. 4.3.6 Interoperable of cyber regulations for various future critical infrastructure the pipeline The U.S. federal government has notified multiple critical infrastructure nodes of the intentions to regulate cybersecurity structures. After the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack in 2021, regulated by The industry was Transportation Security Administration (TSA). According to the operators of oil and gas pipelines, the regulations were 'full of awkward or inexplicable requirements that could endanger the safety of pipeline and supply of fuel'. An all- encompassing solution cannot be developed given that various regulatory agencies supervise diverse sectors of critical infrastructure such as the energy, oil, gas, health care, and financial industries. This is more complicated since such new regulations must consider technical professionalism when being circulated. Simultaneously, industry officials who consider the cybersecurity of their operating and information technology systems as a future contemplation must ensure that their architecture is sufficiently provided with additional resources and developments. Table 1. Standardization efforts to secure the energy infrastructures in the U.S. and Europe 5. Conclusion To conclude, the frequency and sophistication of malicious cyberattacks on energy systems increase as the world heads toward more digitalization. The potential for malicious actors to access and adversely affect physical energy assets via cyber means is a primary concern for countries around the globe. The Russian-Ukrainian conflict serves as an example of the growth of the utilization of cyberattacks on the energy infrastructure of a country to advance political, social, and military agendas. This work provides a discussion on the cybersecurity of the energy industry, and identifies the reasoning and motives behind cyberattacks. It also sheds the light on different standardization efforts made in this manner, and highlights a set of defensive steps to improve the resiliency of the grids against cyberattacks. It is recommended that future studies should analyze and investigate data, techniques, and procedures relative to cyberattacks in the energy field to assess the impact these attacks could have on nations since cyberattacks are currently being considered a weaponized tool in recent years. Finally, researchers need to require bridging various explore methodologies disciplinary fields to understand better the challenges of securing the energy infrastructure, the most complex system humanity has ever built. that
DOI: 10.1093/milmed/usad458 Document Version Peer reviewed version Link to publication record in King's Research Portal Citation for published version (APA): Bricknell, M., Licina, D., Erickson, E., Varnau, E., Payne, L., & Ediger, M. (2023). Expanding Global Health Engagement through Multilateral Security Organization. Military Medicine, Article usad458. https://doi.org/10.1093/milmed/usad458 Citing this paper Please note that where the full-text provided on King's Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post-Print version this may differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination, volume/issue, and date of publication details. And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal, if citing you are again advised to check the publisher's website for any subsequent corrections. General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. *Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research. *You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain *You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure@kcl.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim. Download date: 16. Jan. 2025 King's Research Portal ACCEPTED AUTHOR MANUSCRIPT Derek Licina, Martin Bricknell, Elizabeth Erickson, Erika Varnau, Lee Payne, Mark Ediger, Expanding Global Health Engagement through Multilateral Security Organizations, Military Medicine, 2023;, usad458, https://doi.org/10.1093/milmed/usad458 Words (abstract): 438 Words (body text): 4328 Tables: 1 Figures: 3
UNIVERSITYOF CALIFORNIA, SANDIEGO 3 1822 02984 1632 Implementing PLAN COLOMBIA IR/PS STACKSHVM36 Special Series U.S. SECURITY POLICY IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE : Why Colombia , Why Now, and What Is To Be Done? Max B. Manwaring Strategic Studies InstituteSSI -The Dante B. Fascell North - South Center UNIVERSITY OF MIAMI Prudens Futuri U.S. Army War Colleg
Connections: The Quarterly Journal ISSN 1812-1098, e-ISSN 1812-2973 James K. Wither, Connections QJ 15, no. 2 (2016): 73-87 http://dx.doi.org/10.11610/Connections.15.2.06 Research Article Making Sense of Hybrid Warfare James K. Wither George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies, http://www.marshallcenter.org Abstract: The term hybrid warfare has been widely analyzed by scholars, policymakers and commentators since Russia occupied Crimea in March 2014. The topic has ceased to be a subject only studied by military strate- gists, but has entered the wider policy domain as a significant security challenge for the West. This article seeks to place the debate about hy- brid warfare in a broader analytical and historical context and summa- rizes discussion to date on this and related strategic concepts. The Rus- sian approach to hybrid warfare as demonstrated by operations in Ukraine is a particular focus for discussion. Keywords: Warfare, Strategy, Russian Federation, NATO, European Secu- rity. Introduction Since the Russian Federation invaded Crimea in March 2014, analysis and commentary on the concept of hybrid warfare have increased exponentially.1 An Internet search will identify hundreds of entries covering the phenomenon. 1 Recent analyses include: Frank Hoffman, "On Not-So-New Warfare: Political Warfare vs. Hybrid Threats," War on the Rocks (blog), 28 July 2014, http://warontherocks.com/ 2014/07/on-not-so-new-warfare-political-warfare-vs-hybrid-threats (accessed 8 De- cember 2015); Max Boot, "Countering Hybrid Warfare," in Armed Conflict Survey 2015, ed. Nigel Inkster (London: IISS, 2015); Ralph D. Thiele, "Crisis in Ukraine - The Emergence of Hybrid Warfare," ISPSW Strategy Series, May 2015; Rod Thornton, "The Changing Nature of Modern Warfare," RUSI Journal 160:4 (2015): 40-48; Law- rence Freedman, "Ukraine and the Art of Limited War," Survival 56:6 (2014): 7-38; Michael Kofman and Matthew Rojansky, "Kennan Cable No. 7: A Closer Look at Rus- sia's Hybrid War," Wilson Center, 14 April 2015, https://www.wilsoncenter.org/ publication/kennan-cable-no7-closer-look-russias-hybrid-war (accessed 8 December 2015). Partnership for Peace Consortium of Defense Academies and Security Studies Institutes Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 4.0 James K. Wither, Connections QJ 15, no. 2 (2016): 73-87 Hybrid warfare has become the most common term used to try and capture the complexity of twenty-first-century warfare, which involves a multiplicity of actors and blurs the traditional distinctions between different types of armed conflict and even between war and peace. Hybrid warfare has ceased to be a topic only for military strategists, as it has now entered the broader public do- main and become a major security concern for Western governments. Both NATO and the European Union (EU) are working on strategies to strengthen defensive capabilities and prevent hybrid attacks. This article seeks to clarify the different ways in which the term hybrid warfare and related terms have been used by scholars and policy analysts and summarize discussion on the topic to date. The paper will examine, in particu- lar, the Russian approach to hybrid warfare as demonstrated by operations in Ukraine and will briefly assess the significance of these developments for Western security policy. Defining Hybrid Warfare Not surprisingly, there are many definitions of hybrid warfare. The concept has been delineated in different, if related, ways and these definitions have evolved in a relatively short period of time. Defining hybrid warfare is not just an academic exercise. The way the term is defined may determine how states perceive and respond to hybrid threats and which government agencies are in- volved in countering them. One approach to hybrid warfare takes an historical perspective. This defines the term simply as the concurrent use of both conventional and irregular forces in the same military campaign. Military historian Peter R. Mansoor, for exam- ple, defines hybrid warfare as "conflict involving a combination of conventional military forces and irregulars (guerrillas, insurgents, and terrorists), which could include both state and non-state actors, aimed at achieving a common political 2 Viewed from this perspective, hybrid warfare is clearly nothing new. purpose." There are numerous examples of hybrid techniques and approaches at the tac- tical, operational and strategic levels stretching back at least as far as the Pelo- ponnesian War and the writings of the Chinese philosopher, Sun Tzu, in the fifth century BC. Irregular fighters have proved to be the bane of numerous conventional militaries. Formidable armies such as Napoleon's Grand Armee and Hitler's Wehrmacht struggled to combat irregular fighters who understood and exploited the local human and geographical terrain and targeted vulnera- ble logistic bases and lines of communication. Over time, guerrilla operations had a significant and lasting impact on the broader conventional military cam- paigns of which they were part. Recent counter insurgency (COIN) campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan have once again highlighted the difficulty of defeating de- 2 Peter R. Mansoor, "Hybrid War in History," in Hybrid Warfare: Fighting Complex Opponents from the Ancient World to the Present, ed. Williamson Murray and Peter R. Mansoor (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 2. Making Sense of Hybrid Warfare termined irregular fighters without committing human rights abuses against the local population and consequently undermining domestic and international public support for the campaign. During the 2000s, the use of the term "hybrid" became a common way to describe contemporary warfare, particularly because of the increasing sophisti- cation and lethality of violent non-state actors and the growing potential of cyber warfare. Although there was no agreement that this necessarily consti- tuted a new form of warfare,3 definitions of hybrid warfare emphasized the blending of conventional and irregular approaches across the full spectrum of conflict. For example, in 2007 Frank G. Hoffman, a leading analyst of the con- cept, defined hybrid warfare as "Threats that incorporate a full range of differ- ent modes of warfare including conventional capabilities, irregular tactics and formations, terrorist acts including indiscriminate violence and coercion, and criminal disorder, conducted by both sides and a variety of non-state actors." During its war with Georgia in 2008, Russia, for example, made use of a combi- nation of regular armed forces, South Ossetian and Abkhazian militias and Rus- sian special operations forces (SOF) operating covertly as "local defense" troops. The mixing of conventional and irregular methods of warfare arguably distinguished such hybrid wars from their historical forms. In the past, conven- tional and irregular operations tended to take place concurrently but sepa- rately, rather than being integrated. In addition, operations by irregular fighters were normally secondary to campaigns by conventional military forces. Prior to 2014, the conflict between Israel and Hezbollah in 2006 was the most frequently used example of a war that fitted contemporary definitions of hybrid warfare. Hezbollah, which had been trained and equipped by Iran, sur- prised Israel with its sophisticated combination of guerrilla and conventional military tactics and employed weaponry and communication systems normally associated with the armed forces of developed states. At the strategic level, Hezbollah made effective use of the Internet and other media for information and propaganda. Its information management proved much more successful than Israel's in influencing global opinion from the start of the conflict. As the discussion above illustrates, a hybrid combination of conventional and irregular methods of warfare has been used throughout history. Yet what is apparent from Hezbollah's example and others, including the guerrilla fighters in Chech- nya and more recently Islamic State (IS), is that modern weapon systems have greatly increased the lethality of non-state actors. Developments in infor- mation technology have also provided these groups with an unprecedented ability to engage in information warfare and compete effectively with states to shape public opinion. The US Quadrennial Defense Review Report in 2010 3 U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), Hybrid Warfare, GAO-10-136R (Washington, DC: GAO, 2010), available at http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-10- 1036R (accessed 4 December 2015). 4 Frank G. Hoffman, Conflict in the 21st Century: The Rise of Hybrid Wars (Arlington, VA: Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, 2007), 8. James K. Wither, Connections QJ 15, no. 2 (2016): 73-87 acknowledged these changes when it defined hybrid warfare in the following manner: "today's hybrid approaches may involve state adversaries that employ protracted forms of warfare, possibly using proxy forces to coerce or intimi- date, or non-state actors using operational concepts and high-end capabilities traditionally associated with states." Hybrid Warfare Post 2014 As noted above, Russia's actions in Ukraine in 2014 intensified interest in the concept of hybrid warfare. For many Western commentators, "hybrid" ap- peared to be the best way to describe the variety and blending of tools and methods employed by the Russian Federation during its annexation of Crimea and support to separatist groups in eastern Ukraine. Russian techniques in- cluded the traditional combination of conventional and irregular combat oper- ations, but also the support and sponsorship of political protests, economic co- ercion, cyber operations and, in particular, an intense disinformation campaign. In an interview in July 2014, former NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Ras- mussen described Russian tactics as "hybrid warfare," which he defined as "a combination of military action, covert operations and an aggressive program of 6 The 2015 edition of Military Balance provides a very compre- disinformation." hensive definition of the latest manifestation of hybrid warfare, highlighting the methods employed, namely "the use of military and non-military tools in an integrated campaign, designed to achieve surprise, seize the initiative and gain psychological as well as physical advantages utilizing diplomatic means; sophis- ticated and rapid information, electronic and cyber operations; covert and oc- casionally overt military and intelligence action; and economic pressure." What distinguishes this definition of hybrid warfare from those discussed earlier is the emphasis on non-military methods of conflict and, in particular, information warfare. The employment of coercive information operations is the most distinguishing feature of the recent descriptions of hybrid warfare and allows some comparisons to be drawn between IS's campaigns in the Middle East and the very different war and theater of operations in Ukraine. IS has ef- fectively blended conventional and guerrilla tactics and gross acts of terrorism, but it has also exploited propaganda and information warfare to an unprece- dented extent for a non-state actor. Sophisticated social media campaigns have glorified its cause and high-quality visual propaganda has contributed to the 5 Department of Defense, Quadrennial Defense Review Report (Washington, DC: De- partment of Defense, 2010), 8, http://www.defense.gov/Portals/1/features/ defenseReviews/QDR/QDR_as_of_29JAN10_1600.pdf (accessed 4 December 2015). 6 Mark Landler and Michael R. Gordon, "NATO Chief Warns of Duplicity by Putin on Ukraine," The New York Times, 8 July 2014, www.nytimes.com/2014/07/09/world/ europe/nato-chief-warns-of-duplicity-by-putin-on-ukraine.html (accessed 7 Decem- ber 2015). 7 "Complex Crises Call for Adaptable and Durable Capabilities," The Military Balance 115:1 (2015): 5. Making Sense of Hybrid Warfare group's ability to recruit thousands of foreign fighters to its ranks. Information warfare was also central to Russia's successful campaign in Crimea in 2014. At the tactical level, electronic warfare (EW) and cyber attacks neutralized the ability of the Ukrainian authorities to respond, while broader media exploita- tion techniques blurred the lines between truth and falsehood, creating an al- ternative reality for those observers who accepted the Russian media's view of events. Russia's strategic information campaign in Ukraine sought to exploit existing societal vulnerabilities, weaken government and state institutions and undermine the perceived legitimacy of the Ukrainian state. Like IS, Russia used information operations to influence and shape public perception, a recognition that the latter has become the strategic center of gravity in contemporary armed conflicts. It is hardly surprising that Russian analysts have argued that information and psychological warfare are the foundations for victory in what they refer to 8 A recent NATO Strategic Communications (STRAT- as "new-generation war." COM) Center of Excellence (COE) report on Russian information warfare in Ukraine drew similar conclusions regarding the significance of "information su- periority" to Russia's success,9 while NATO's Supreme Allied Commander Eu- rope (SACEUR), General Philip Breedlove, reflected the consternation felt by many Western officials when he described the Russian campaign as "the most amazing information warfare blitzkrieg we have ever seen in the history of in- 10 According to former Russian TV producer Peter Pomer- formation warfare." antsev, this "Blitzkrieg" goes much further than historical information warfare operations. He argues that "The new Russia doesn't just deal with the petty disinformation, forgeries, lies, leaks, and cyber-sabotage usually associated with information warfare. It reinvents reality." Related Theories of Contemporary Warfare Arguably, the concept of hybrid warfare adds little to the notion of asymmet- rical warfare. This term, popularized after the Cold War, sought to characterize 8 For example, see Sergei G. Chekinov and Sergei A. Bogdanov, "The Nature and Con- tent of New Generation War," Voyenna Mysl (Military Thought) 4 (2013): 12-23, http://www.eastviewpress.com/Files/MT_from%20the%20current%20issue_No.4_2 013.pdf (accessed 9 December 2015). 9 NATO Strategic Communications Center of Excellence (StratCom COE), Analysis of Russia's Information Campaign Against Ukraine (Riga: NATO StratCom COE, 2014), 4, http://issuu.com/natostratcomcoe/docs/ukraine_research_natostratcomcoe_02 (accessed 15 December 2015). 10 John Vandiver, "SACEUR: Allies Must Prepare for 'Hybrid Warfare,'" Stars and Stripes, 4 September 2015, www.stripes.com/news/saceur-allies-must-prepare-for- russia-hybrid-war-1.301464 (accessed 7 December 2015). 11 Peter Pomerantsev, "How Russia Is Revolutionizing Information Warfare," Defense One, 9 September 2014, http://www.defenseone.com/threats/2014/09/how-russia- revolutionizing-information-warfare/93635 (accessed 10 December 2015). James K. Wither, Connections QJ 15, no. 2 (2016): 73-87 the kinds of strategies and tactics employed by state and non-state opponents of the US and its allies to counter the West's overwhelming technological ad- vantages and firepower. These asymmetrical methods could naturally shift into non-military fields expanding the grey area between war and peace that Russia has exploited in Ukraine. However, so-called asymmetrical methods of warfare, essentially pitting one's strengths against another's weaknesses, have always been a feature of successful military strategies. Many of the elements identi- fied as hybrid warfare also appear in discussion of "fourth-generation warfare," a contested theory originating in 1990s.12 A key concept in fourth-generation warfare is the exploitation of emerging information technology, which allows non-state military actors to erode the will of states to fight by targeting deci- sion-makers and the public through the globalized, networked media and the Internet. Thus, widening a "war" to include cultural, social, legal, psychological and moral dimensions where military power is less relevant. Recent definitions of hybrid warfare are also similar to the Chinese theory of unrestricted warfare. This concept is discussed at length in the book, Unre- stricted Warfare, which was published in 1999 by two colonels from the Peo- ple's Liberation Army (PLA).13 It proposes methods of warfare to enable coun- tries like China to confront an opponent with superior military technology such as the US. Similar to the concept of hybrid warfare, unrestricted warfare in- volves the use of a multitude of means, both military and non-military, to strike back at an enemy during a conflict. One of the authors stated in an interview that "the first rule of unrestricted warfare is that there are no rules, with 14 Consequently, unrestricted warfare methods include: nothing forbidden." computer hacking, subversion of the banking system, markets and currency manipulation (financial war), terrorism, media disinformation and urban war- fare. The authors, Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui, argue that developments in information technology and globalization have conclusively changed the con- duct of war, which has consequently moved beyond the military realm to a "new concept of weapons," such as the use of computer viruses during combat operations.15 These "new" techniques of warfare are curiously referred to as "kinder weapons," but the aim of their use remains Clausewitzian, that is to compel an opponent to bend to China's will. As a quotation from "Unrestricted Warfare" explains: "a kinder war in which bloodshed may be avoided is still 12 Tim Benbow, "Talking 'Bout Our Generation? Assessing the Concept of Fourth-Gen- eration Warfare," Comparative Strategy 27:2 (2008): 148-163. Even more contested is the notion of "Fifth Generation Warfare," on which readers can see for example Donald J. Reed, "Beyond the War on Terror: Into the Fifth Generation of War and Conflict," Studies in Conflict and Terrorism 31:8 (2008): 684-722. 13 Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui, Unrestricted Warfare (Beijing: PLA Literature and Arts Publishing House, 1999), 2, https://www.oodaloop.com/documents/unrestricted.pdf (accessed 15 December 2015). 14 Ibid., 2. 15 Ibid., 25. Making Sense of Hybrid Warfare war. It may alter the cruel process of war, but there is no way to change the es- sence of war, which is one of compulsion, and therefore it cannot alter its cruel 16 The extent to which unrestricted warfare has become offi- outcome, either." cial Chinese doctrine is not clear. However, recent reports suggest that these techniques may be evident in China's "three warfares" approach to its territo- rial claims in the East and South China seas.17 Are Non-Military Hybrid Methods Really Warfare? Hybrid warfare tends to be used to describe all wars that are not strictly con- ventional, namely waged between the legally constituted armed forces of na- tion-states. Arguably, therefore, the term hybrid warfare is too vague to be of practical use to analysts and policymakers. As Latvian analyst, Janis Berzins, notes "The word hybrid is catchy, since it may represent a mix of anything." The inclusion of a range of non-military means in a definition of hybrid warfare runs the risk of describing normal inter-state competition and conflict as war even in the absence of the threat or use of violence. A realist concept of international politics already posits inter-state relations as naturally competi- tive and conflictual. An environment in which sovereign states, primarily con- cerned with their security, act in pursuit of their national interests and struggle for power, cooperating and competing with other states as necessary to best achieve their objectives. The usual economic, diplomatic and informational measures used in inter-state competition are not normally classified as warfare in the absence of the threat or actual use of force. However, many of the statements emanating from Russia's government and media suggest that Rus- sia perceives itself as at "war" with Western democracy, culture and values.19 This development suggests that, at least for the foreseeable future, Russia has returned to a Soviet-era style battle of ideas with the West where, to reverse Clausewitz, peace is essentially a continuation of war by other means. Rod Thornton has suggested that the West must adjust to a situation where it is in a "permanent" state of hybrid war with Russia.20 However, war in this context is 16 Ibid., 30. 17 See for example: John Garnaut, "US Unsettled by China's Three Warfares Strategy: Pentagon Report," The Sydney Morning Herald, 11 April 2014, www.smh.com.au/ federal-politics/political-news/us-unsettled-by-chinas-three-warfares-strategy- pentagon-report-20140410-36g45.html (accessed 16 December 2015); and James R. Holmes, "Exposing China's Provocations," The Diplomat, 28 August 2014, http://thediplomat.com/2014/08/exposing-chinas-provocations (accessed 16 De- cember 2015). 18 Janis Berzins, "A New Generation of Warfare," Per Concordiam 6:3 (2015): 24, http://www.marshallcenter.org/mcpublicweb/MCDocs/files/College/F_Publications/ perConcordiam/pC_V6N3_en.pdf (accessed 9 December 2015). 19 "Russia's War on the West," The Economist, 14 February 2015, www.economist.com/ news/leaders/21643189-ukraine-suffers-it-time-recognise-gravity-russian-threatand- counter (accessed 17 December 2015). 20 Thornton, "The Changing Nature of Modern Warfare," 45. James K. Wither, Connections QJ 15, no. 2 (2016): 73-87 arguably the status quo of international politics and it is misleading and poten- tially dangerous to describe Russia's broader aims and methods simply as a form of warfare. Analyst Ralph Thiele, for example, includes Russian invest- ments in key sectors of European economies and Russian organized crime links with local criminal elements in the Russian model of hybrid war.21 In this au- thor's opinion, only when non-military methods are coordinated or integrated with the actual threat or use of armed force should policymakers describe in- ternational political rivalry as a form of hybrid warfare. Naturally, a response to a real threat of hybrid warfare would require a comprehensive or "whole of government" effort, as non-conventional methods of warfare cannot be ad- dressed by military means alone. It is probably a stretch to classify efforts to target corrupt Russian officials as a form of "warfare," although it might cer- tainly be an element of soft power employed by Western states in their compe- tition with Vladimir Putin's Russia. Overall, it is worth remembering that even at the height of the Cold War, the Soviet Union and the US were able to temper their rivalry to pursue mutually beneficial nuclear arms control agreements and limit proxy wars. New Generation Warfare: Russia's Hybrid Warfare Like the authors of Unrestricted Warfare, Russian analysts make no secret that their objective is to advocate approaches to warfare that will counter perceived overweening and threatening US power. Many Russian commentators and an- alysts claim that Russia has been under sustained and effective information at- tack by the US since the 1980s. Events such as perestroika and the "color revo- lutions" and multilateral organizations such as the IMF and World Bank are all considered instruments of irregular warfare intended to destabilize Russia.22 From a Russian perspective, the seizure of Crimea and operations in eastern Ukraine are strategic defensive campaigns to counter US hybrid warfare against its national interests and values. Hybrid warfare is a Western term, not a Russian one. When Russian analysts write on the subject, they use the terms "new generation warfare" or "non-lin- ear war." The former was introduced to Western audiences through a paper published by General Valery Gerasimov, the Chief of the Russian General Staff, in February 2013. Consequently, the Russian approach to hybrid war is some- times referred to inaccurately as the "Gerasimov Doctrine." Gerasimov de- scribes new generation warfare as: "the broad use of political, economic, in- formational, humanitarian and other non-military means ... supplemented by 21 Thiele, "The Crisis in Ukraine," 6. 22 Berzins, "A New Generation of Warfare," 23; and Bret Perry, "Non-Linear Warfare in the Ukraine: The Critical Role of Information Operations and Special Operations," Small Wars Journal, 14 August 2015, http://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/non- linear-warfare-in-ukraine-the-critical-role-of-information-operations-and-special- opera (accessed 9 December 2015). Making Sense of Hybrid Warfare 23 Gera- civil disorder among the local population and concealed armed forces." simov recognizes that many of the methods he identifies were not traditionally part of what would be considered wartime activities. However, he believes that they are typical of twenty-first-century warfare and actually more significant for the achievement of strategic goals than military means because they can reduce the fighting potential of an enemy by creating social upheaval and pro- moting a climate of collapse without the overt use of violence.24 Nevertheless, it is evident from Gerasimov's paper that the armed forces have an essential supplementary role in new generation warfare. This is particularly the case with special operations forces (SOF) that can be used under the guise of "peace- keeping and crisis regulation" to link up with opposition groups inside a tar- geted state.25 In their discussion of new generation warfare, analysts Sergei G. Checkinov and Sergei A. Bogdanov also envisage the employment of SOF in "large-scale reconnaissance and subversive missions under the cover of the information operation." The use of SOF under cover of information operations was clearly evident in Ukraine in 2014. Covert spetsnaz units (the "little green men") were employed to seize government buildings and key infrastructure targets and arm separatist militia, while the Russian government spread doubt and confusion through re- peated denials of Russian involvement. Other techniques of hybrid or new gen- eration warfare were used to demoralize and intimidate opponents. These in- cluded exercises by Russian conventional forces close to the Ukrainian border, cyber attacks on Ukrainian government systems and a wider diplomatic and media offensive to undermine the legitimacy of the new government of Ukraine. The ultimate aim of this sort of "warfare" is to apply psychological pressure to cause the collapse of the target state from within so that the politi- cal objectives of the conflict can be achieved without fighting - the acme of strategic skill according to Sun Tzu. Berzins accurately sums up the Russian ap- proach to modern warfare as follows: ... the main battlespace is in the mind and, as a result, new-generation wars are to be dominated by information and psychological warfare ... The main objective is to reduce the necessity for deploying hard military power to the minimum necessary, making the opponent's military and civil population support the attacker to the detriment of their government and country.27 23 General Gerasimov's article is available in English from Mark Galeotti, "The 'Gerasimov Doctrine' and Russian Non-Linear War," In Moscow's Shadows (blog), 6 July 2014, https://inmoscowsshadows.wordpress.com/2014/07/06/the-gerasimov- doctrine-and-russian-non-linear-war (accessed 11 December 2015). 24 Ibid., 2-3. 25 Ibid., 3-4. 26 Chekinov and Bogdanov, "The Nature and Content of New Generation War," 20. 27 Janis Berzins, Russian New Generation Warfare in Ukraine: Implications for Latvian Defense Policy (Riga: National Defence Academy of Latvia, 2014), www.naa.mil.lv/ ~/media/NAA/AZPC/Publikacijas/PP%2002-2014.ashx (accessed 14 December 2015). James K. Wither, Connections QJ 15, no. 2 (2016): 73-87 Many of the methods Russia has used in Ukraine date back to the Soviet era and the application of maskirovka, or military deception. This was effectively applied by Soviet forces during World War II and in Cold War proxy conflicts. For example, maskirovka was used on a grand scale in Operation Bagration in 1944 when an entire German Army Group was destroyed. At the other end of the conflict spectrum, maskirovka techniques were employed in Eastern Eu- rope after 1945 when Soviet interior ministry troops (NKVD) used covert means to take over state institutions, undermine civil society and crush all opposition to the imposition of Communist rule.28 In the twenty-first century, advances in information technology and processing have greatly increased the scope of maskirovka, allowing the Russian government to employ multimedia propa- ganda and misinformation on a massive scale. These have been used to build support for the government's foreign policy within Russia and to wage a wider "information war" against Ukraine and the West. In the current NATO context, Julian Lindley-French defines maskirovka as "war that is short of war, a pur- poseful strategy of deception that combines use of force with disinformation and destabilisation to create ambiguity in the minds of Alliance leaders about how best to respond." The concept of "reflexive control" (perception management) is a key ele- ment of maskirovka.30 This originated with the work of former Soviet psycholo- gist Vladimir Lefebvre who developed the theory while researching ways to in- fluence and control an enemy's decision-making processes. The theory can be described as the use of specially-prepared information that inclines an oppo- nent to voluntarily make a decision that has been predetermined as desirable by the initiator of the information. Methods include blackmail, camouflage, de- ception and disinformation, all intended to interfere with an opponent's deci- sion-making cycle in a way favorable to Russian policy. The continued post-So- viet interest in reflexive control techniques was demonstrated by the launch of a new security studies journal entitled Reflexive Processes and Control as re- cently as 2001.31 In practice, the execution of new generation warfare poses significant chal- lenges. A wide range of parties--civil and military, regular and irregular, as well 28 For a detailed account of this process see: Anne Applebaum, Iron Curtain: The Crush- ing of Eastern Europe 1944-1956 (London: Allen Lane, 2012). 29 Julian Lindley-French, NATO: Countering Strategic Maskirovka (Calgary: Canadian De- fence and Foreign Affairs Institute, 2015), 4, http://www.cgai.ca/nato_countering_ strategic_maskirovka (accessed 8 December 2015). 30 Timothy L. Thomas, "Russia's Reflexive Control Theory and the Military," Journal of Slavic Military Studies 17 (2004): 237-256; and Maria Snegovaya, Putin's Information Warfare in Ukraine: Soviet Origins of Russia's Hybrid Warfare (Washington, DC: Insti- tute for the Study of War, 2015), http://understandingwar.org/sites/default/files/ Russian%20Report%201%20Putin%27s%20Information%20Warfare%20in%20Ukrain e-%20Soviet%20Origins%20of%20Russias%20Hybrid%20Warfare.pdf December 2015). (accessed 11 31 Thomas, "Russia's Reflexive Control Theory and the Military," 237. Making Sense of Hybrid Warfare as their activities--must be coordinated, integrated and controlled to achieve the overall military and political objectives. Unified political control is especially difficult, as irregular and state actors often have differing political interests. Even for an authoritarian state such as Russia, control and coordination proved difficult during operations in Ukraine, which appear to have been less well-or- chestrated than many Western commentators believed at the time.32 For example, analysis by the Wilson Center concludes that Russian actions in Ukraine were not part of a well-coordinated master strategy, but rather re- flected "the unplanned succession of different tools to fit different--often un- expected--operational realities." Russian Hybrid Warfare as a Threat to NATO Much concern has been expressed about NATO's vulnerability to Russian hy- brid warfare techniques. Naturally, the security of the Baltic States, with their significant Russian-speaking minorities, is of particular concern. It has been longstanding Russian policy to weaken, divide and ultimately neutralize NATO. The Baltic States provide Putin with the potential leverage to achieve this aim. Just as Russian meddling in Ukraine started long before the annexation of Cri- mea, political and social pressure has been ratcheted up in the Baltic States.34 Some European intelligence agencies have also expressed fears about Bulgaria, where the entire political system is believed to be compromised by criminal or- ganizations linked to the Russian state by Russian intelligence agencies.35 NATO strategy to combat Russian hybrid warfare needs to combine diplomatic, mili- tary, informational, economic and law enforcement efforts. Yet such a compre- hensive approach must be properly integrated, rather than simply involving ci- vilian agencies in support of military forces or replacing armed forces with ci- vilian measures due to a reluctance to deploy the former. In a crisis involving the Baltic States, Russia would likely seek to divide NATO members by staying below an obvious Article 5 threshold, at least initially. As during the Ukraine crisis in 2014, disinformation, intimidation and propaganda would be used to try to encourage the less robust members of NATO to accept the Russian version of events, which would, of course, conveniently reinforce their existing inclination to avoid a military response. Disinformation would be used against NATO governments and wider public opinion to keep the Alliance politically and militarily off-balance. Intimidation would likely highlight Russia's 32 Freedman, "Ukraine and the Art of Limited War," 11; Kofman and Rojansky, "A Closer Look at Russia's Hybrid War," 5. 33 Kofman and Rojansky, "A Closer Look at Russia's Hybrid War," 5. 34 See for example Andrew Osborn, "Putin a Threat to Baltic States, Western Officials Say," Reuters, 19 February 2015, http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-russia- baltics-idUKKBN0LN0FT20150219 (accessed 18 December 2015). 35 Sam Jones, "Ukraine: Russia's New Art of War," Financial Times, 28 August 2014, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/ea5e82fa-2e0c-11e4-b760-00144feabdc0.html (ac- cessed 10 December 2015). James K. Wither, Connections QJ 15, no. 2 (2016): 73-87 apparent willingness to employ nuclear weapons to de-escalate NATO "aggres- sion." Effective strategic communication could counter Russian narratives, but it would need to be responsive, coherent and consistent. Although the EU adopted a strategic communication action plan in 2015, there is no evidence that EU planning includes coordination with the NATO'S STRATCOM COE, which was founded in 2014.36 Such coordination would be vital to respond effectively to a Russian disinformation and propaganda campaign. Unfortunately, authori- tarian societies have an advantage, as they can more easily mobilize all of the resources of the state for political purposes without the restrictions imposed by a decentralized distribution of power and a democratic consensus-building pro- cess. In contrast, liberal democracies have a distaste for propaganda and psy- chological warfare and the NATO alliance would find it difficult to agree on the content and presentation of a strategic communication campaign. As the STRATCOM COE acknowledges, Russia has a potential asymmetrical advantage over the West, as the latter's free media cannot compete with centrally-con- trolled and synchronized Russian information warfare operations.37 However, NATO may not be as vulnerable to information warfare as many believe. Propaganda can have a particularly strong effect when a population, as in Russia, is denied alternative sources of information, but elsewhere propa- ganda must be plausible enough to shape beliefs and emotions and exploit general uncertainty, mistrust and paranoia. Russian government pronounce- ments and media sources have become increasingly discredited in the West, especially since their responses to the shooting down of flight MH 17 over Ukraine in July 2014. Increased control of the national media and the Internet as well as harassment of dissenters made it possible to shape Russian public opinion. However, despite the efforts of Russia Today (RT) and a veritable army of Internet trolls to contradict and abuse news outlets and social media that take anti-Russian positions, Russian information operations have largely failed to influence non-Russian-speaking audiences.38 Ukrainian government sources claim that there is now a very low level of public confidence in any official Rus- sian media,39 and despite Russia's intense information campaign, support for pro-Russian separatists even amongst Russian-speaking Ukrainians was lower 36 Bastian Giegerich, "Hybrid Attacks Demand Comprehensive Defence," Ethics and Armed Forces 2 (2015): 15, http://www.ethikundmilitaer.de/fileadmin/Journale/ 2015-12_English/Hybrid_Warfare-Enemies_at_a_Loss_2015-2.pdf (accessed 9 De- cember 2015). 37 StratCom COE, Analysis of Russia's Information Campaign Against Ukraine, 3. 38 Freedman, "Ukraine and the Art of Limited War," 23; and Snegovaya, "Putin's Infor- mation Warfare in Ukraine," 18-20. 39 "Sociology of Information Warfare in Ukraine," Europe Insight, 11 October 2015, (accessed http://en.europeinsight.net/sociology-of-information-warfare-in-ukraine 10 December 2015). Making Sense of Hybrid Warfare than anticipated. This partly explains Russia's need for more overt military in- volvement in the conflict in the summer of 2014.40 During crisis, Russian tactics will likely involve covert support to local pro- Russian activists. As in Ukraine, ambiguity and deniability will make it difficult to confirm that an attack is under way. The following quotation from Mark Galeotti starkly illustrates the potential difficulties of responding to these methods, especially forcefully: The first little green man, after all, might instead be a 15-year-old Russian-Esto- nian girl waving a "Russian-speakers have rights, too" placard in the border city of Narva. Shoot her? Of course not. The second might be her older brother, throwing rocks at the police coming to arrest her. Shoot him? Hopefully not, es- pecially as you can guarantee that footage of the incident would promptly be blasted across Russian TV channels.41 Paramilitary police would probably be better equipped and trained than soldiers to handle such situations, which is another example of where closer cooperation between the EU and NATO would undoubtedly be beneficial. If a crisis were to escalate, Russia might be tempted to seize territory in vul- nerable frontline states by overt military means before the Alliance could mount an effective collective response.42 The nightmare scenario for NATO would be the occupation of part of a member state, even if temporarily. Such action would force the Alliance to invoke Article 5 of the Washington Treaty and risk a direct armed confrontation with a nuclear-armed Russia or fail to re- spond to the aggression and risk the collapse of NATO as a viable military alli- ance. Despite the misgivings of states such as Germany, effective deterrence will require the permanent stationing of significant multinational forces on the territory of states that might be at risk in order to deny Russia the option of a military fait accompli. Although NATO's new 5,000-strong Very High Readiness Joint Task Force (VJTF) should be able to deploy rapidly, it may still arrive too late to deter Russian adventurism. The Russian approach to hybrid warfare does not exclude the direct use of military force when necessary. In summer 2014, when Russia had exhausted its use of non-military hybrid methods, mili- tary operations in Ukraine took on the character of limited conventional war. Russian battalion tactical groups (BTG) intervened directly in combat against the Ukrainian army. Fighting involved clashes between armored forces, intense urban infantry battles, heavy artillery barrages and, at least on the Russian side, the employment of "drones" for surveillance and target acquisition, electronic 40 Kofman and Rojansky, "A Closer Look at Russia's Hybrid War," 5. 41 Mark Galeotti, "Time to Think About Hybrid Defense," War on the Rocks, 30 July 2015, http://warontherocks.com/2015/07/time-to-think-about-hybrid-defense (ac- cessed 8 December 2015). 42 See Elbridge Colby and Jonathan Solomon, "Facing Russia: Conventional Defence and Deterrence in Europe," Survival 57:6 (2015): 23-24. James K. Wither, Connections QJ 15, no. 2 (2016): 73-87 warfare and air defense assets.43 NATO troops have already started to learn from the experiences of Ukrainian soldiers about Russian tactics and technolo- gies, in particular the use of drones to direct artillery fire and Russian electronic jamming capabilities.44 However, such tactical improvements alone are unlikely to be enough to provide credible conventional deterrence against armed at- tack. Conclusion Hybrid warfare does not change the nature of war. Violence remains at the core of hybrid warfare as it does any other form of war, and its aim is the same as any other act of war, namely, to exploit the threat or use of organized vio- lence to gain physical or psychological advantages over an opponent. However, the plethora of terminology--hybrid, asymmetrical, unconventional, non-lin- ear, new generation, fourth and fifth generation, grey wars etc.--reflects the difficulties that strategists and scholars continue to have in categorizing the complex armed conflicts of the twenty-first century. Although the term "hy- brid" is currently the most popular, it is by no means the only one to describe these wars. The fact that many armed conflicts blur the lines between war and peace and involve the use of instruments that were not traditionally part of warfighting further complicates the problem. It is undoubtedly a challenge for traditional security establishments to address the wide range of threats identi- fied by the analysts and scholars of hybrid warfare. Cast the definitional net too wide, and a term like hybrid warfare becomes too all-encompassing to be of any practical use to policymakers. Define warfare too narrowly, and policymak- ers may fail to appreciate the significance of many non-traditional techniques of warfare that are being employed by an adversary as a prelude or adjunct to the use of military force. Regardless of how the threat is labelled, strategists must decide how best to address the methods employed by their adversaries, whether state or non- state actors. Sometimes the most appropriate responses may involve the appli- cation of specific political, informational, economic, diplomatic or, in the case of a physical threat, military tools of statecraft. More complex threats require a whole of government or comprehensive approach. Usually, the best strategies involve the coordination and direction of all of the effective instruments of state power, no matter how the threat is defined. Undoubtedly, NATO needs to enhance its military deterrence capability, but in the case of the West's adver- sarial relationship with Putin's Russia, the temptation to describe this rivalry as 43 Philip A. Karber, Lessons Learned from the Russo-Ukrainian War (Vienna, VA: The Po- tomac Foundation, 2015). 44 "Situation Report," Foreign Policy, 10 December 2015, http://foreignpolicy.com/ 2015/12/10/situation-report-carter-gets-through-another-hill-appearance-new- book-by-former-intel-chief-nato-training-against-russian-tactics-india-comes-to-the- pentagon-house-wants-to-supply-kurds-new-nort (accessed 14 December 2015). Making Sense of Hybrid Warfare hybrid warfare may inflame an already challenging security situation and blind governments to potentially productive traditional diplomatic policy initiatives. About the author Professor Wither is a retired British Army officer and former researcher in 20th century warfare at the Imperial War Museum in London. He has taught terror- ism, warfare and related security studies subjects at a wide variety of institu- tions, including the FBI Academy, the UK Defence Academy, the NATO School, the NATO Centre of Excellence - Defence Against Terrorism (COE-DAT), the Geneva Centre for Security Policy and various staff colleges and military univer- sities in Europe and Eurasia. E-mail: witherj@marshallcenter.org
Essar et al. Globalization and Health (2022) 18:74 https://doi.org/10.1186/s12992-022-00868-8 COMMENTARY Open Access Addressing the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan through $10 billion Afghani assets: what are the challenges and opportunities at hand? Mohammad Yasir Essar1*, Henry Ashworth2 and Arash Nemat1 Abstract Background: The current humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan started after the US and international allies' withdrawal. This has put the country in a dire situation as the globalized infrastructure supporting Afghanistan came to halt. Moreover, 10 billion USD of Afghanistan's assets were frozen by the U.S and other international organizations after the Taliban takeover. This further exacerbated the humanitarian crisis and quickened the economic collapse in Afghani- stan. These assets should be freed to support the people of Afghanistan. Main body: In order to address this situation, international oversight is needed to allow these funds to be returned and used by the Central Bank of Afghanistan without misappropriation by the Taliban. We suggest a number of short term interventions and long term considerations to improve the situation in Afghanistan with the $10 billion in frozen assets. In the short term, economic stability and the hunger crisis should be addressed by funding international organizations such as the World Food Program and national Afghani NGOs. In the long term funds should be used to build back the economy, build healthcare infrastructure, and support the development of women and children. Conclusion: At this juncture, the world and international organizations have a moral and ethical responsibility to ensure the 10 billion in funds go to the owners, the people of Afghanistan. With oversight and fund distribution to the right partners, progress can be made by providing support in security, healthcare, education and food resources. This calls for action to deliver $10 billion of assets to the Afghan people in a transparent manner, avoiding further tension and disasters in the country. Keywords: Afghanistan, Humanitarian crisis, Economic crises, Globalization, Healthcare, Education Introduction Humanitarian crises and their mitigation are becoming more inextricably tied to globalization and geopolitics. As nation states often cause crises through war or per- secution of citizens, we rely on international organiza- tions and NGOs to address the outcomes of these crises *Correspondence: yasir.essar@gmail.com 1 Kabul University of Medical Sciences, Kabul, Afghanistan Full list of author information is available at the end of the article [1]. This cycle does not address the underlying cause of crises, but further perpetuates the need for a global response. This cycle is no more evident than in Afghan- istan. It is important for us to learn lessons from the impacts globalization has had on the economy and health of Afghanistan in order to prevent further disasters in the future. After the US withdraw a total 10 of billion US dollars in assets, once held overseas by the Central Bank of Afghan- istan, has now been frozen [2] as the US and other inter- national allies understandably do not want these assets to (c) The Author(s) 2022. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ publi cdoma in/ zero/1. 0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Essar et al. Globalization and Health (2022) 18:74 Page 2 of 4 fall into the hands of the Taliban. This presents a global ethical problem on who has a right to the assets and what should be done with them. Already the US has divided these assets, but the new holders of these assets and the holders of the other 3 billion in assets have a moral obli- gation to use them to support the people of Afghanistan. We fervently believe that all of these funds belong to the people of Afghanistan and should be used to prevent further development of a humanitarian crisis and eco- nomic collapse. There cannot be a better time for coun- tries and organizations to fulfill their moral responsibility and contribute to rebuilding Afghanistan, after their dec- ades of involvement in war and conflict. In this com- mentary we discuss ways in which the Taliban could be engaged, and short term and long term priorities to help stabilize Afghanistan. We also describe how this problem could be prevented in the future to ensure that a sover- eign nation's assets are used to support the health and wellbeing of their people. Engaging the Taliban and international oversight At this critical juncture, providing aid to the people of Afghanistan and stabilizing the economy is impossible without diplomatic relations being made with Taliban. While doing so is a much larger topic than this article, we must emphasize that the Taliban's actions and use of funds should be closely monitored by international governing bodies. In particular, a top priority is to work with the Taliban government to ensure that the Central Bank of Afghanistan is independent, monetary flow is internationally monitored, and that funds can be frozen at any time if there is suspicion of abuse. The freezing and withholding of assets should be clearly delineated by any misuse of the Taliban. International organiza- tions that have worked in Afghanistan in the past, such as the UN, World Bank, and International Monetary Fund (IMF) could coordinate together to fulfill this regulatory role. As the IMF has the technical skills and infrastruc- ture to monitor financial transactions, their monitoring could be followed by enforcement from the UN or World Bank. While it will be challenging to monitor and ensure proper spending, it is essential to ensure proper disbursal of humanitarian funds and a a stable economic future for Afghanistan. Short term interventions There are a number of short-term concerns in the devel- oping humanitarian crises in Afghanistan, but wide- spread starvation and economic collapse remain among the highest. It is estimated that 55% of all 43 million Afghans will face acute food insecurity in the next few months with nearly 9 million people almost living in famine conditions [3]. This issue is likely only to worsen as food storages are depleted and the drought persists. While there are a number of problems associated with the eco- nomic impacts and sustainability of direct food aid, the crisis in Afghanistan demands action now to save lives. Further support should be given to the WFP, which has been working on the ground to secure nutrition for 24 million Afghans [4]. Food aid should be diverse and also meet the nutritional needs of the 13 million children fac- ing mal-nutrition. As previously mentioned, an independent functioning central bank is essential to keeping the economy moving and regulated. In the short term, portions of this funding should be used as direct cash transfers, which have been shown to have positive effects on improving the econ- omy and health outcomes in humanitarian contexts [5]. Organizations such as the WFP have already been scal- ing to provide cash transfers to over 6 million Afghans. However, as more organizations begin providing cash transfers, there should be further collaboration within an economic recovery cluster with input from the UN and World Bank. Putting money into the hands of Afghanis at this time is ensuring spending and economic activity. Moreover, local Afghan organizations such as Afghan Health and Development Services (AHDS), and Just For Afghan Capacity and Knowledge (JACK) should be sup- ported to continue their work in providing health ser- vices to the population. Long term In the long term, the billions in assets should be used to help grow and stabilize the country of Afghanistan. In particular the economy, healthcare, and the rights of women and children should be prioritized [6, 7]. As Afghanistan relied upon these international groups for decades, these groups should restart their work to help the country gain more financial independence. In addition to loans through an independent central bank, assets should be given to microloan organizations such as the Afghanistan Rural Microcredit Programme (ARMP) to help distribute funds quicker to the people of Afghani- stan. As the Afghan people have the right to start their own businesses by investing in the private sector, it is essential that Afghan currency does not lose its value in the market. After withdrawal of international support, Afghani- stan's largest health services provider, Sehatmandi, lost its functionality [8]. This crippled the healthcare infra- structure and healthcare personnel organizations, which need to be rebuilt [9]. Assets should be used by the UN and NGOs to first ensure that healthcare facilities are properly supplied and healthcare workers are paid. After the healthcare system is returned to a functional state, Essar et al. Globalization and Health (2022) 18:74 Page 3 of 4 assets could be used to address the most pressing health- care problems in the country including maternal mortal- ity, child mental health, and malnutrition, and respiratory diseases [4, 10, 11]. As women and children are vulnerable groups in Afghanistan and essential to future prosperity of the country, a special effort should be made to ensure their success. Frozen assets should be used to leverage protec- tions and rights for women. The assets should be used to ensure that females are allowed to pursue education and work in careers of their choosing. Funds should be used to support local NGOs already doing this work, such the Afghan Women's Network and the Afghan Women's Council. Female healthcare workers should be guaran- teed safety to continue their work under this new regime. Given the rates of malnutrition and the mental health impact on children from the decades of conflict, child health should be made an urgent priority. Child health issues could be addressed by strengthening the education system and building support systems within education. In the education system, girls should be allowed to pur- sue their education in universities without any barriers. In particular, separating males and females in the edu- cation system, which creates unequal learning environ- ments, will worsen conditions. While cultural contexts matter, it should not be a challenge for young girls and women to pursue education. As the future of Afghanistan relies on the country's women and children these assets should be leveraged to ensure their rights and access to education. Conclusion Afghanistan's twenty-year dependance on international funding and support has now left the country without its own sustainable structures to ensure economic and physical health. The globalization of politics and eco- nomics has left the people of Afghanistan to suffer in a dire humanitarian crisis that is continuously com- pounded by events, including the recent earthquake. The current problem of what to do with the 10 billion in Afghan assets again clearly demonstrate the problems of globalized politics and economies in responding to health crises around the world. The death and suffer- ing of the Afghan people call for swift and purposeful action using the systems that could have prevented such a crisis. At this critical juncture the Biden Admin- istration, which divided the 7 billion of US held assets, but still controls their disbursement is morally and economically obligated to ensure all assets go to help- ing the people of Afghanistan in a transparent man- ner. The organization's holding the other 3 billion in assets including the World Bank must also follow suit. Withholding these assets sets a dangerous precedent of neo-colonial international governance that allows for- eign governments to keep assets belonging to a people, especially when they are in dire need of help. Interna- tional law should begin to reflect the impact that glo- balization has on a country's economic assets and how this connects to a people's health and wellbeing. As the crisis in Afghanistan goes beyond deciding these assets, the US and the international allies must feel their obli- gation beyond what has currently plagued the country by ensuring healthcare availability, safety and prosper- ity of Afghanistan and its people. If action is not taken, millions of Afghans will suffer, die, and the country will face a bleak future. The events currently unfolding in Afghanistan are a warning sign for the impact globalized politics and economics can have on a country's health. Especially when working with hostile governments such as the Taliban, international organizations should endeavor to create independent systems for resources distribu- tion and quality assurance. The two key lessons from Afghanistan are that international intervention in a sovereign nation necessitates an international response to reconstruct that nation and that in a globalized economy the people of a sovereign nation deserve to benefit from their countries assets even if they are held internationally. Abbreviations WFP: World Food Program; UN: United Nation; IMF: International Monetary Fund; US: United States. Acknowledgements None. Authors' contributions HA conceived the idea for the paper. MYE, AN, wrote the first draft of the manuscript. HA critically reviewed, revised, and approved the final draft of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final draft. Funding Not applicable. Availability of data and materials Not applicable. Declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate Not applicable. Consent for publication All authors agreed to the publication of this manuscript. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Author details 1 Kabul University of Medical Sciences, Kabul, Afghanistan. 2 Alameda Health System, Highland Hospital, Department of Emergency Medicine, Oakland, California, USA. Essar et al. Globalization and Health (2022) 18:74 Page 4 of 4 Received: 25 March 2022 Accepted: 24 July 2022
