DTRA MISSION DTRA provides cross-cutting solutions to enable the Department of Defense, the United States Government, and international partners to Deter strategic attack against the United States and its allies; Prevent, reduce, and counter WMD and emerging threats; and Prevail against WMD-armed adversaries in crisis and conflict. CO O P E R AT I V E T H R E AT R E D UC T I O N P R O G R A M BIOLOGICAL THREAT REDUCTION PROGRAM CHEMICAL SECURITY AND ELIMINATION The DoD’s CTR Program is a threat based, counter-weapons of mass destruction program, and the Department works cooperatively with allies and partners to reduce or eliminate WMD threats. The DoD’s CTR Program is guided by the 2017 National Security Strategy, 2018 National Defense Strategy, the DoD Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Strategy. Its primary purpose is to reduce and eliminate WMD threats. The cooperative nature of the DoD’s CTR activities yields a secondary benefit of strengthening regional alliances, deepening existing partnerships, and attracting new partners. Consequently, the DoD, through the CTR Program, has helped create a network of likeminded allies and partners with increased threat reduction capabilities that contribute and advance the interests and security of the United States of America. The CSE Program supports the cooperative elimination of chemical weapons (CW), related materials, and infrastructure; and builds the capacity of international partners to secure toxic industrial chemicals (TIC) and CW precursors, as well as associated components, materials, equipment, technology, and expertise. KEY FACTS • The CSE Program has ongoing projects with nine countries and international organizations to prevent VEOs or state actors with nefarious intent from stealing, diverting, or intentionally releasing TICs or CW precursors, and related materials. • The CSE prevents the proliferation of materials, technologies, and expertise to state and non-state actors with the intent to develop or enhance CW capabilities. CW elimination & physical security, Libya • The CSE Program performs this mission by improving partner country regulatory frameworks, chemical security practices, export control practices, and insider-threat mitigation techniques. CW elimination and destruction facility in Russia CW elimination, Syria 