CO O P E R AT I V E T H R E AT R E D UC T I O N P R O G R A M BIOLOGICAL THREAT REDUCTION PROGRAM U.S. Department of Defense Cooperative Threat Reduction Program (DoD CTR) Biological Threat Reduction Engagement with THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION, 1996-2013 The Cooperative Threat Reduction Program was launched in 1991 when Congress directed the Department of Defense to help secure former Soviet weapons of mass destruction. Since 1991, Congress has provided $2.3 billion to support CTR efforts globally.merging threats. KEY FACTS • When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, the newly created Russian Federation inherited a complex of biological weapons (BW) laboratories and manufacturing plants that were part of the largest biological weapons program in history and were developed and maintained in violation of the Biological Weapons Convention. • The Russian Federation was the DoD CTR Program’s foundational partner from 1991 to 2014, with a focus on de-militarizing the Soviet Union’s WMD arsenal. Biological threat reduction activities were implemented between 1996 and 2014, and ended with the illegal invasion of Crimea. • DoD’s CTR partnership with the International Science and Technology Center (ISTC) provided the legal framework to implement DoD CTR activities with the Russian Federation. The ISTC was established in Moscow by international agreement in 1992 between the Russian Federation, United States, European Union, and Japan to provide former Soviet weapons scientists with new opportunities for sustainable, peaceful employment. • ISTC States Parties (including the United States) provided approximately $1.5 billion in funding to support WMD threat reduction efforts in Russia. This funding went toward efforts that included: » Biological Safety and Security (BS&S): DoD CTR helped the Russian Federation reduce its proliferation risks by enhancing BS&S at former Soviet BW facilities to limit unauthorized access, thefts, or accidents involving dangerous materials and to prevent terrorist groups or states seeking weapons of mass destruction (WMD) capabilities from acquiring dual-use equipment or weaponizable materials. » Collaborative Biological Research (CBR): DoD CTR provided funding in 1996 for Western biodefense researchers to engage former Soviet BW scientists to permanently redirect their expertise to benign civilian purposes and careers, thereby preventing trained BW researchers from transferring their BW expertise to terrorist groups or states seeking WMD capabilities. • In 2010 President Medvedev signed a Presidential Decree withdrawing from the ISTC, but allowed the ISTC to continue operating in Moscow for several more years. 1  • Infrastructure Elimination: At the request of the Russian Federation, DoD CTR worked to consolidate or dismantle infrastructure that previously been used for BW research and production, with a focus on the State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology (Vector). • DoD CTR engaged approximately 400 Russian scientists and spent more than $100 million on activities at key facilities, including (with date of funding conclusion) but not limited to: » State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology (Vector; FY2011) » State Research Center for Applied Microbiology (Obolensk; FY2005) » All-Russian Research Institute for Phytopathology (Golitsino; FY2013) » Pokrov Biologics Plant (Pokrov; FY2013) » All-Russian Scientiﬁc Research Veterinary Institute (Kazan; FY2013) » All-Russian Research Institute of Animal Health (Vladimir; FY2013) • Russian scientists also participated in collaborative research projects on pathogens such as Monkeypox, Anthrax, Brucellosis, Yesinia Pestis (Plague), Marburg, Ebola, Smallpox, and Crimean Congo Hemorrhagic Fever, just to name a few. • No additional activities were funded in Russia by CTR beyond FY2014 (Section 1246 of the FY2015 US Congress National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) prohibited funding “for any bilateral military-to-military cooperation between” the U.S. and RF). 2 