DTRA MISSION The Defense Threat Reduction Agency enables the Department of Defense, the United States Government and International partners to counter and deter weapons of mass destruction and emerging threats. CO O P E R AT I V E T H R E AT R E D UC T I O N P R O G R A M BIOLOGICAL THREAT REDUCTION PROGRAM NIGERIA The Biological Threat Reduction Program (BTRP), part of the Department of Defense’s Cooperative Threat Reduction (DoD CTR) program, is implemented by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) to promote international cooperation in the fields of public health, disease detection, and biological security. Since 2018, the program has worked with the Nigerian public health sector to enhance its diagnostic and disease detection capabilities to support both local and international efforts to diagnose, track, and respond to potential infectious disease outbreaks. KEY FACTS • The U.S. does not own or control any Nigerian laboratories: all facilities supported by BTRP are owned and operated by the government of Nigeria. • Recent Russian disinformation falsely asserts that there are “UScontrolled laboratories” in Abuja, Lagos, and Zaria which have played a role in recent Monkeypox outbreaks. The government of Nigeria recently rejected this false claim (see offcial statement below). • Monkeypox is indigenous to Nigeria and represents a constant threat to its population. BTRP’s objective is to provide assistance to the Nigerian government in order to help Nigerian partners prevent, detect, and mitigate outbreaks caused by this virus and other endemic pathogens. • BTRP supports only peaceful activities, such as training on biorisk management and infection prevention and control. For example, BTRP has provided an incinerator to the Nigerian Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) National Reference Laboratory in Abuja for safe disposal of laboratory waste. BTRP has worked with our Nigerian partners to identify potential future laboratory and facility infrastructure enhancements to ensure safety for both the Nigerian staff and public. • In cooperation with the Nigerian government, BTRP has trained Nigerian healthcare workers to recognize signs and symptoms of monkeypox and teach participants in the proper use of personal protective equipment, safe and secure handling of samples, and diagnostic and reporting procedures. This training was confned to textbook and classroom instruction. • DoD CTR is one of many organizations collaborating with Nigeria to reduce the threat of infectious disease in Nigeria and the region. Other supporters include the European Union, Global Affairs Canada, Germany’s Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ), the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the Korean International Cooperation Agency (KOICA), World Health Organization, international universities and research institutions, as well as other U.S. interagency partners. • BTRP’s cooperation with Nigeria meets the highest international ethical and technical standards. The program promotes sharing knowledge, expertise, and technology to provide diagnostic capabilities in a safe and secure manner. READ MORE: https://ncdc.gov.ng/news/371/nigeria-hasno-laboratories-where-monkeypox-virus-isgenerated 