DTRA MISSION DTRA provides cross-cutting solutions to enable the Department of Defense, the United States Government, and international partners to Deter strategic attack against the United States and its allies; Prevent, reduce, and counter WMD and emerging threats; and Prevail against WMD-armed adversaries in crisis and conflict. CO O P E R AT I V E T H R E AT R E D UC T I O N P R O G R A M BIOLOGICAL THREAT REDUCTION PROGRAM GLOBAL NUCLEAR SECURITY The DoD’s CTR Program is a threat based, counter-weapons of mass destruction program, and the Department works cooperatively with allies and partners to reduce or eliminate WMD threats. The DoD’s CTR Program is guided by the 2017 National Security Strategy, 2018 National Defense Strategy, the DoD Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Strategy. Its primary purpose is to reduce and eliminate WMD threats. The cooperative nature of the DoD’s CTR activities yields a secondary benefit of strengthening regional alliances, deepening existing partnerships, and attracting new partners. Consequently, the DoD, through the CTR Program, has helped create a network of likeminded allies and partners with increased threat reduction capabilities that contribute and advance the interests and security of the United States of America. The GNS Program supports the cooperative dismantlement of nuclear weapon programs, as well as the transportation and disposition of related systems and associated materials. The GNS Program builds international partner capacity and expertise to secure nuclear weapons, nuclear weapons-usable or high-threat radiological materials, nuclear weapons components, equipment, technology, and expertise, and to counter nuclear smuggling. KEY FACTS The GNS Program has ongoing projects with five countries and four international organizations. These projects assist partner nations to: • Develop capabilities to secure vulnerable nuclear and radiological materials, facilities, and related expertise; • Develop capabilities to detect and interdict illicit trafficking of nuclear and radiological materials and return them to regulatory control and to detect, identify, and return nuclear weapon components to regulatory control; and • Prevent the proliferation of materials, technologies, and expertise to state and non-state actors with the intent to develop or enhance nuclear weapon capabilities. Additionally, the GNS Program works with U.S. interagency and DoD partners to support deliberate and contingency nuclear weapon and fissile material transportation and disposition missions. Training center built to ensure longterm nuclear weapons security Cesium irradiators transported for final disposition Railcar used to ship nuclear weapons cargo to dismantlement facilities 