DTRA MISSION DTRA provides cross-cutting solutions to enable the Department of Defense, the United States Government, and international partners to Deter strategic attack against the United States and its allies; Prevent, reduce, and counter WMD and emerging threats; and Prevail against WMD-armed adversaries in crisis and conflict. CO O P E R AT I V E T H R E AT R E D UC T I O N P R O G R A M BIOLOGICAL THREAT REDUCTION PROGRAM BTRP The U.S. Department of Defense’s Cooperative Threat Reduction program (DoD CTR) invests in strengthening public and veterinary health systems in partner countries in order to improve their ability to detect, report, and mitigate the spread of infectious disease outbreaks. This work is critical to building a strong global health security system which is the world’s best defense against pandemics. The Biological Threat Reduction Program (BTRP), part of the DoD CTR Program, is implemented by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency. BTRP protects the United States, its Armed Forces and our allies from biological threats by strengthening the capabilities of partner nations and the international community to prevent, detect and prepare for outbreaks caused by biothreat pathogens. KEY FACTS • The BTRP implements activities to prevent the proliferation of biological weapons (BW); BW components; and BW-related materials, technologies, and expertise. • The program supports more than 30 partner nations as they seek to improve their biosafety, biosecurity, and biosurveillance (BSV) capabilities to counter biological threats. • The BTRP has worked cooperatively with countries across Africa, Europe, the Middle East, and Asia to secure pathogen collections; enhance biosafety and biosecurity (BS&S) at vulnerable sites; and strengthen the capacity for public health and veterinary systems to detect, characterize, and report disease outbreaks rapidly and accurately. • The program has cooperated with key nations, international organizations, and other global health security donors to build sustainable BSV capabilities with appropriate BS&S practices at national, regional, and global levels. • Through early detection, the DoD CTR Program, with BTRP partners, has helped bolster partner nations’ abilities to quickly contain outbreaks at their source before such outbreaks become destabilizing regional events or pose a threat to U.S. Armed Forces, the U.S. homeland, U.S. interests, or U.S. allies and partners abroad 